===== Page 298 =====
GAÜDAVAHO (Translation)
Benediction
1. Pay homage, at the very outset, to the Self-born
(Brahmi) residing within the orbit of a lotus and wearing a
white sacred thread which was, as if, a fibre of the lotus-stalk
extracted while coming out through the belly of Visņu.
2. Victorious is He (Brahma) who dwells in a lotus
with its big seeds lying hidden inside the ring of its pericarp
(Kannia), looking as if, they are so many worlds (bambhamda)
treasured up (sihānikaa) in it.
3. Bow to Him (Brahmi) whose mass of atoms, as it
were, later accepted by Him as the substance for the creation
of the worlds, stays (stored up) in His residence-lotus, under
the guise of its dust-particles (imgicchi).
4. Victorious is He (Brahmi) for whom the circle
(pariradi) of worlds serves for the purpose of a rosary of crystal
beads, revolving (avattamti) in His hand continuously
(to mark the cycle of their creation and destruction), ever
engaged, as He is, in His meditational prayers (javojjaa).
5. Bow to the Emergence (viniggama) of the Navel-
Lotus (Brahma) out of the sprout (kamdala) of the lotus-bulb
in the form of the huge Sega situated down below, after having
broken through the black (Krsna-Visnu) mud.
6. Victorious is the charming repose (parisanthia) of
Visnu having the (dark) shade of a black antelope, on the
world's globe, which, flooded with the (deluge) waters,
looked like the orb of the prodigious moon.
7. Victorious is the Man-Lion with His sharp nail-tips.
enveloped in smoke issuing from the friction of the Demon's
chest-bones (uratthi), thus appearing as if He had seized in His
clutches a mass of clouds in His roaring fury.
8. Bow to Him (Narasimha) whose massive hands
were withdrawn, finding no other task (vavasãa) to accomplish,
since the Demon had his broad chest torn open by only the tips
of His claws.
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 299 =====
Gailḍavaho
9. Bow to the Lord Visnu in His incarnation of the Man-
Lion, who, splashing (pallavia) the fringes of the firmament with
the blood of the dissected Demon, appeared to have unfolded the
evening (scene, to satisfy the stipulation) of the time of the enemy's
death.
10. Victorious is the throaty voice of Vignu, which, for long,
destroyed the articulation of (other) words by its growl, His
throat having been made hoarse by roar (bukkära), even though
He had cast away the form of the Man-Lion.
11. Victorious are the angry outbursts (samrambha) of the
Man-Lion, (directed) solely against the Demon, completely
ignoring the Quarter-elephants, the moon-deer and thunder
(rasia) of the mass of deluge-clouds.
12. Victorious is the Man-Lion's massive neck with its
reddish mane, which is, as it were, a collected bundle of lightning
streaks, now left without support, as the clouds were shattered
by the fury of His roar.
13. Victorious is the tusk of the Great Boar, jutting out
from the passage of His mouth, like a lotus-stalk from the bulbous
root of the lotus inside the navel of His stomach.
14. Bow to Him, who, in His state of the Boar in which
He transformed Himself by His power, bore the Earth Himself,
as it were, although (actually) resting on Sega, since His reflec-
tion was cast (ghadamta) in the jewels of his hoods.
15. Victorious is the Earth along with Sesa, dug up and
(tossed) far away (dürukkhaä) by the Boar's breaths, thus look-
ing as if (She is) holding an umbrella (up-side down) to ward
off the (blaze of) the suns pushed underneath at the bottom.
16. Victorious are the various bodily parts of Visnu in
His Dwarf incarnation, depressed and elevated (thaudam) because
of the uneven (distribution of) flesh on His body, having been
stuffed, as it were, with worlds that could not be contained
(sapahuppanta) in His small stomach.
17. Victorious is the Great Tortoise lifting the (sunken)
Earth with His body, as with a hand, with His (out-stretched) five
fingers, since, under the pressure of the Earth, His mouth-tip and
four feet happened to be pushed out (sisäria).
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 300 =====
Benediction
3
18. May the creeper-like hair-line (roma-la) on the belly
of Visnu in his fraudulent female form protect you-(the hair-
line) which looked like a row of bees pursuing the lotus hidden
inside His stomach (navel).
19. Victorious is He, for whom, in His transformation as
a young female, the worlds, receding (osaranta) within from His
thin belly, procured the voluminous bulk for breasts and
buttocks.
20. Victorious is He who wears a garland of wood-flowers,
encircled (pariāla) by rows of humming bees behaving as watch-
men (jämailla) and thus looking as an enclosure (vai) thrown
round His harem, the residence of Laksmi.
21. Victorious is the mouth of Visņu (Krsna) kissed by
Yasoda in His infancy-the mouth that looked like a lotus shooting
upwards, as it were, having been denied an outlet of the navel.
22. May the fresh nail-marks caused (kärasão) by Rädhä,
appearing like rays of the Kaustubha jewel on the chest of Krsna,
take away your grief.
23. Bow to Him (Vignu) who cut the head of Rāhu, (for
which reason) his grief revolves, remaining just unexpressed
(asiccaria) (and unrelieved), (finding an outlet only) in base-
less, slight sighs.
24. Bow to the feet of Balaräma, fastened together (sam-
dania) by his black upper garment slipping down through the
effects of intoxication, thus giving an impression of the Yamuna
river rolling (on his feet), being frightened of his angry grunts.
25. May the eyes of Balarama, flushed with intoxication,
emitting, as it were, the lustre of jewels on a thousand hoods
lying dormant within him, drive away your sins.
26. Victorious is the swaggering step of Balarama and
Krsna which presses down under its weight Sega and the Tortoise,
making them realise the pang (viana) thereof within themselves
(and suffer) with the least murmur of a protest (siruvālambham).
27. Bow to that Yellow-clad (Visņu) who has a natu-
rally dark-complexioned body, made so variegated (sabala) by
the periods of disappearance and emergence of day and night,
as it were.
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 301 =====
Gaiidavaho
28. Victorious are the circled imprints (nivesamagga)
of Laksmi's breasts on the chest of (Vigu), the Destroyer of
Madhu, stamped (on it) by her collapsing pigment and showing
like leaves of the lotus-plant (sprouting) from His navel.
29. Victorious is He (Siva) whose frowning arch of eye-
brows, closely contacting His forehead-eye, looks like the burnt-
up black bow-stick of Cupid, even to-day.
30. Bow to Him (Siva) who, even to-day, holds back the
Moon fastened firmly in His matted hair, even though (through
friendship) he had resolved (kaa-vavasãa) as it were, to fall in
the fire of His third eye.
31. May He extend to you all happiness,- (He) who
perhaps has His own forehead (now) resting on His head under
the guise of the moon, being pushed upwards (pellia) by His very
broad third eye.
32. Victorious is He, by whose third eye rushing ahead
(ahidhāvina), as it were, Cupid was swallowed (gilia) under the
guise of His (flowery) bow, rendered ruddy by the thick mass of
pollen (flung) from the flowers (of the bow) when fully stret-
ched (kaddhia).
33. Bow to the Pasupati's high stature (paritthiam) with
its constantly dwarfed shadow (Vämaṇacchäa) shining, as He
is, in the light of the Moon, (who is) his possession (held) in
the lap of his crown (maidocchamga).
34. Victorious is Pasupati's tying of His matted hair by
means of Vasuki, relaxing at the cecession of the ocean's churning.
His chest languishing on account of the friction of mountains
against it.
35. We bow to Siva, the Mountaineer, whose forehead
(became) red as He rubbed it in wrath against Arjuna with quiver-
ing fingers, thereby inhibiting, as it were, the opening of His third.
eye.
36. Victorious is He, on whose throat, as soon as He gulped
the poison, manifested a black line, resembling a scar left by the
Death's noose, fastened for a moment and released instantan-
eously.
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 302 =====
Benediction
37. Bow to Him who still has His third eye, when some-
how missing (lhasia) in its place, substituted by Visnu with His
own eye-leaf, given by Him as a flowery offering (in deep devo-
tion).
38. Victorious is the line of poison's lustre, looking like
His head's shadow collected at the bottom of His throat, on
account of the (refulgent) moon's light overhead.
39. Bow to the Moon of the Three-eyed God (Siva) who
stands reduced to (the size of) a digit, his heart being completely
dedicated to the propitiation of Gauri and Siva, who stay (blended)
only by their bodily halves.
40. Bow to Him whose decorative skullbone on His head,
drank for long, feeling very thirsty, as it were, the stream of the
God's River (Galg), by means of an oyster-shell of the Moon's
crescent, joined to its mouth.
41. Bow to the Pinäkin's (Siva's) forehead-eye, with its
rolling, reddish pupils, in which the lump of the Universe, made
a sacrificial offering at the time of the world's destruction, is still
blazing (in flames), as it were.
42. Bow to Him (Kärtikeya) whom Cupid would avoid,
(apprehending) short shrift at His hands, as from (any member
of) His family; (and hence) even to-day he does not shoot his
shaft at Him through fear.
43. Victorious is that Goddess, by whose foot, adorned
with anklets, the Aśoka tree in the form of the Demon Mahisa,
being struck on his trunk (shoulder), put blossoms of blood.
44. May the eyes of the revered Lady (Pärvati) who
blushed at the first embrace of her Lord Siva, give you happiness,
(although they had) little strength (left in them), being seized
by the venomous lustre of His throat.
45. Pay your homage to the rambling of Kāli, the veri-
table black Night of Destruction, on the eve of the world's dis-
solution, (brightened) by multifarious skulls (big and small)
decorating Her body and thus looking like a big gathering of the
millions of odd-sized moons (shining) on all nights.
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 303 =====
Galidavaho
46. May the physical form of Camunda remove your fear
-the Form embellished with rod-like big veins and stuffed with
coils (of entrails), which a thin belly could hardly contain.
the
47. Victorious is that (Sarasvati, the Goddess of Learning),
who, having been spoiled by excessive fondling inside
(parental home of) petals of the lotus, the seat of (her father)
the Four-faced (Brahmä), now wanders (wantonly) with a
stealthy step on the multitudes of poets' tongues.
48. Bow to him (Moon) whose orb appears lustre-less
over the shadow of his spot, perhaps, on account of the fact that
his central stock of loveliness filtered through the breach made by
Ganga (in the celestial floor), at the time of her descent (on the
earth), leaving Him void and empty (tuccha).
49. Bow to Him (The Sun) whose chariot those horses,
complexioned like Lapis Lazuli, carry, their bodies appearing dis-
coloured because of the enveloping darkness, which, earlier, is
pushed back every day (by the rising dawn).
50. Victorious is the Sun's mass of rays, which, for the
world's preservation, glows dim in a shrunken collected form,
but, which, expanding, as it were, at the time of the world's anni-
hilation, intensifies itself (in a blaze).
51. Bow to him (Sesa) who, when the Boar (Visņu)
held it up, bore the earth's globe, lessened in weight, distributed,
as it was, on His many heads, while its reflection was cast in the
jewels of all His hoods.
52. Bow to the pillar-like tusk of the Elephant-mouthed
(Ganesa), with His huge trunk resting on it, like the Gangetic
stream joined with the column of Yamuna's waters.
53. Bow to that Ganesa, who, in his playful frolics of
holding the huge trunk by means of His tusk, makes as it were, the
summits of the mountain Meru an arena for the meeting of the
Himalayas and the Vindhyas.
54. Victorious is the tusk of Ganapati, gathered at the
end of the left half of His mouth, (giving an impression of) His
smile, as it were, when feeling abashed at (the manifestation) of
passion's ardour by His parents, Pärvati and Siva, ever united, as
they are, bodily.
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 304 =====
Benediction
55. Bow to the ramblings of Lakgml, which fully honoured
(i. e. possessed) the graces of alluring agility (of dalliance), while
(finding Her way) after the death of the Demon-King, to go near
Visņu in a disguised form.
56. Victorious is the emergence of Laksmi from the ocean,
holding in Her hands a lotus and the moon, although feeling (all
the time) fully self-conscious of the charming excellences of Her
own face.
57. Bow to the two hands of Cupid, besmirched with marks
of collyrium, though He wiped off the tears of love from the eyes
of His wife Rati, looking like bees as it were, clinging to the frag-
rance of the flowery bow and arrows, as He grasped them (by his
hands).
58. May Gag give you happiness-(Galga) who rolls
on the lap of (her father) Himalaya from the head of Siva, voicing
Her bitter complaint, as it were, against (His other daughter),
Gaurt, for her painful behaviour of jealousy.
59. Victorious is the River (Gaga) in whose waters on
the head of God Siva, floats the skull (of the fifth head) of
Brahma, who thereby holds up His faultless claim of being the
Grand-father', undisputed even to-day.
60-61. Bow to the waters of Gang, which are absolutely
pure and white for these reasons: Firstly, they have been stirred
and washed (viccholia) by the lustrous rays from the nails of
Vignu's toes; secondly, they blend with the rays of Siva's moon;
and (finally), falling on the mountain Himalaya, they absorb
the snow-shades.
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 305 =====
Now the Eulogy of Poets
62. Victorious, indeed, are these poets, by its presentation
in whose poetic words, this world in all its vicissitudes is seen to
be either a source of deep joy or insipid (and worthless).
63. Successful (in life) are those great poets who, by their
own poetic utterances, establish their greatness and evoke
eulogy.
64. There is all happiness even in the misery of poverty and
misery even in affluence for those whose hearts (yearn to) relish
the pleasure of the essence of Poetry.
65. The charm of Sanskrit speech blooms in its Prakritic
shadow, while the (innate) glory of the Prakrit is heightened,
when touched up by its Sanskritization.
66. What is real is made to look unreal and the unreal looks
perfectly real, while (sometimes) the thing is pictured as it exactly
stands. Such are the (peculiar) ways of good poets.
67. Just as the quality of good administration and the
pompous display of the royal sceptre embellish the great King's
glory, so too, do bombast and sweetness adorn the poet's speech.
68. Even a fraction of Laksmi (Wealth) becomes and
pleases man in its enjoyment. The goddess of Learning, however,
if imperfect, exposes the man to some sort of ridicule.
69. How can my robust (flowery) language (employed)
in the Madhumatha-vijaya shrink to the state of a (concise,
compact) bud? (But then) the later floral bloom of forest-
creepers is much thinner and softer than its first bloom.
70. Censure of a good man, (loosely) talked about by the
wicked, may or may not stick to him. It, however, recoils on
them, by the very sin of indulging in censorious language about
the good.
71. By their (persistent) series of efforts to suppress
(systematically) the merits of others, malicious men become such
connoisseurs of merits, that they themselves, though wicked,
become men of merit, as a result (of the assimilation) of those
very merits (in themselves).
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 306 =====
The Eulogy of Poets
72. Even the pure-minded, alas, feel a pang (of jealousy)
in their hearts at (the praise of) a good man's merits, which
perhaps, is analogous to the pain (of tuskers) in their tusks caused
by impact of the moon's rays!
73. For those to whom condemnation made by unequals
is of the same value as their appreciation, words of deprecation
spoken by them cause no dejection.
74. Great men should rejoice in the eulogistic appreciation
of their own merits, without caring to observe the shadow ( of
bitterness darkening) other's faces, while the blush on their own
faces (on account of praise) is being noticed by them,
being thrown off the balance (of their minds tormented) by their
own (guilty) conduct.
75. Most men, possessed as they are of ordinary intelligence,
hail poets (of mediocre talent); hence is it, indeed, that mediocre
poets have (undeservedly) gained the fame (of great poets).
76. Merit in others, as small as an atom even, captivates
the good man, who finds no satisfaction in his own (outstanding)
merit. This and this much is the sum and substance of character
and judgment (discrimination).
77. Merits of great men, which first hold (their hearts)
fast in their grip, later shine (in their reflection) in others, like
the rays of the moon which first fall on mountain-tops before
(spreading) on the earth.
78. Trying to accomplish the good and the beautiful, every-
thing becomes all the more beautiful; some such thing happens in
their case, too, so much so that they themselves feel greatly
astonished.
79. With merits by the side (to lean upon), one may fee
egoistic; but how can a fellow (be so egoistic) in the absence of
merits? People who cherish (acquisition of) merits allow some
(amount of) pride based on merits, which, however, must not
result in (snobbish) intoxication.
expecting him to be the
(we find that) these great
unique, solitary position,
80. With reference to whom,
second, should jealousy throb, when
ones are already established in their
rising (head and shoulders) above the common man ?
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 307 =====
10
Gaiidavaho
81. Those who doubt their own competence of judgement
when called upon to look into (and decide) the differences of
opinions, can never deliberate and decide for other people from a
position of firmness.
82. Who condescends to find fault with the inferiors? Who
dares to appreciate the superiors? The position of praise and
blame is thus the same (in both these attempts).
83. Those who only listen to and (try to) understand (a
literary piece), but cannot judge for themselves (its merits and
demerits), are unfit to feel elated. How is it then that they are
not ashamed to be puffed up with pride?
84. Earlier poets, through the fault of their times, often
hovered about in their ramblings over paths unbeaten. In modern
times, too, some poets are carried away on difficult (paths in
imitation) of the Genius (of the earlier poets).
85. "How could anything (topic) escape observation (of
the earlier poets) on the paths (of vision) followed by them, (thus
leaving practically no topic for the moderners to poetise)"? True.
If, however, the (traditional and conventional) border-lines be
given up (and the horizons of Imagination be widened), all
(topics) will be just fresh and new to him too -(the modern
poet).
86. Imaginations of other ordinary poets, frantic in their
eager search for themes, ramble about (here and there). These
very themes, however, rush to the hearts of great poets, with no
effort (on their part).
87. Ever victorious is the Poetic speech throbbing with
inspiration, (still fresh in its charming appeal), although drawn
upon for its essence every day by veteran poets since the beginning
of man's life in this world, (remaining intact) with its seal yet
unbroken, as it were.
88. What is more, the good poets, with their minds solely
devoted, have so cultivated the (poetic) speech that these
uncommon ones (poets) have preferred to remain tongue-tied
(for want of a worthy listener).
89. Who cares to deliberate in its special features whatever
(literature) is left behind by them? The excellences of great poets
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 308 =====
The Eulogy of Poets
11
now shine in the glory of their names only, to which they are
transferred.
90. Even others, who somehow feel elated (and elevated)
at the mere fact of having been able to understand and appreciate
great poets in their innermost, intrinsic nature, put on (a mantle
of) their own superiority in vain, only for the misery (it produces).
91. Victorious is the web of fancies of great poets which
appears to be full of conflicting opposites, since it brings about
both delusion and enlightenment, like darkness and light (respec-
tively).
92. It is only in Prakrit that we shall have in an abundant
measure, till (the end of) of the world's duration, a presentation
of ever fresh themes and a rich variety of styles, caressingly cool
and sweet in their composition (Sannivesa).
93. All languages merge in it (Prakrit) and emerge (semi)
from it. Waters pour into the sea and flow away from it.
94. A peculiar delight which dilates and closes the eyes,
thrills the heart, rushing inwards and outwards.
95. For those who have remained ignorant of its (Prakrit's)
excellent features, (we may) have pity, a (contemptuous) laugh
and a thought (that they show) such callous disregard to the
great poets, but no sadness in (our) hearts.
96. What matters it, if those who are neither our superiors
nor our equals, say (things unpalatable)? Whatever that be, great
poets have a right to expect high regard from others.
97. They (great poets) may be without pride or may strut
about inflated by their greatness. They have displayed some
merits, whatever they may be, and hence should be no object of
laughter for commoners.
98. The heart (of a poet undertaking to compose a poem)
is as if somehow apprehensive, embarrassed, stunned, fatigued,
distressed, overwhelmed (apphuynam) and (yet) elevated with
high elation.
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 309 =====
Now begins the Poem
99. Rules there the Lord of the Earth, King Sri Yaśovarman,
who, having removed all sin from the whole world, delighted great
Indra, (for which reason the fame of) his virtues has gone far to
cling to the (ends of the distant) directions.
100. At the time of whose marching (expedition), the earth,
tossed up in dust, reels, as it were, underneath the white parasols,
without, however, leaving the (underlying support of the) hoods
of Sega.
101. At whose marching, Sesa, too, does not cast aside the
Earth, nailed (samdania) as she is, by the jewels driven inside by
the mighty pressure of his army, although (he may be) shaking
his hoods in agony.
102. Whose sword, on the battlefields (randiesu) dripping with
blood and mingled with the (bluish) elephants' rut, oozes, as it
were, a thin stream of liquid (metal), the sword having melted
(viraa) on account of the fire produced, when struck against
the (warriors') armours.
103. Whose feudatories, erstwhile hostile, appear to be
covering up (numia) the frowns formed (on their faces), while
paying forced (hadha) homage with their folded hands, joined
to their foreheads in servile supplication.
104. Who, on occasions of heroic endeavours, glancing
(daradiṭṭha) proudly at his broad right shoulder, makes the
royal Glory resting on his arms, pleased and happy, as it were,
by (granting to her) the favour of his full view.
105. In whose case, the foreheads of his enemy's captive
women darken, as if discoloured by the piercing lustre of his
frightening (vigama) pupils, (when) raised in anger.
106. By the side of whose Tree of Glory, overspread by his
prowess, is seen, as it were, the huge ignominy of his enemy, lying
transformed in a heap in the form of the mass of thick (black)
shadows.
107. Whose voice, deep and demanding great deeds
(mahārambha) like Gañgā (Bhagirathi), roams over all the worlds,
embracing even the oceans.
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 310 =====
Cutting of Mountain-Wings
13
108. To whom all directions hasten in a hurry, as it were,
to serve (him) with waving chowries, disturbed and agitated, as
they are, by a thousand streams of water-spray spouted gleefully
by his victorious elephants, returning (from his compaigns).
And moreover,
109. The lower lip looks charming when up-turned, being
pulled by means of the finger-tips loosely placed on it, revealing
its slightly dented surface on account of the inside (bite) bruises.
110. Sighs somehow are slyly given out (and they) settle
upon (padithia) the sportive lotus (in the hand), forcing up the
filaments in a whirl and stirring the honey at the bottom.
111. Their beauty blooms (all the more), as in their peevish
(mood of) dejection for not having (obtained) the playful pleasures
of love's enjoyment (with him), they pull their curly locks of
hair with the left hand, crush them in vain and strew them about
(on the head).
112. The face develops a charm (in spite of the fact that),
accepting only a single auspicious flower, the decorative wreath
is sent away and the sandal paste, after a slight reverent bow, has
been spurned with averted eyes.
113. (Such is this king) for whom, I imagine, the heavenly
girls languish even now, on account of love's malady, worked up
by the charming sight of his fighting (prowess) in battles.
Or otherwise,
114. The mountains, unable to contain their summits even
in the sky and reverting from the ends of the quarters where their
own ridges had already extended, get (themselves) burnt, having
nowhere else to go to, although they lifted themselves up a little
for flight.
115. The mountains discharge moltern iron, as it were, being
smelted by the fire of the thunderbolt, their slopes enveloped in
coils of smoke issuing from their cave-mouths.
116. The heavenly mountain (Meru), with a mass of fire-
flames falling out from its smoking wings, was observed to be in
close association with the Night and the Day, as it were, which also
moved with him in his hasty flight.
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 311 =====
14
Gaidavaho
117. The thunderbolt, swinging up and down at (every)
resistance, gets itself sharpened on those very mountains on whom
its edge got blunted, as it came down with a crashing sound in its
violent, bouncing impact.
118. The mountain-beloveds suddenly start rolling on the
ground in an agony of miscarriage due to fright, when (they see)
big birds coming back, the moment they flew out from
the caves.
119. The mountain extinguishes the fire caused by wing-cutting,
sitting just at the very place where it is situated, since the oceans
flooded in from both of its sides on the earths' surface which had
caved in on account of pressure.
120. The thunderbolt, although meeting (in a blow) the
rising mountain, whose ridges were being heated every day
(taddiasa) by the movement of the sun's orb, was noticed (by
the mountain) after a long time.
121. The sides of the Malaya mountain went on burning,
its sandal trees, with its branches withering (väa) on account of
the poison-flames and hence being deserted by snakes, while its
fragrant smoke was being availed of by gods (for perfuming)
their spread-out (viasàvia) garments.
122. Masses of mountains, crashing on the ground with
clipped (nisudhia) wings, got fried up in the charming manner
of (dry) leaves, the snakes fleeing in frantic haste that very moment.
123. With great difficulty does Sesa support the earth being
beaten by the heavy thud of the falling, wingless mountains, feeling
(sore and) furious at the fact that his mouths, pierced by his own
fangs, were filled with blood.
124. The mountains, blazing in flames, host of gods
retreating, being repelled by the heat, the sky looks variegated with
rows of bees, frightened by smoke, hovering over the Grand-sire's
(Brahma's) lotus.
125. Mountain-(shaped) beloveds heavy with young ones
hiding inside (lhikka) their caves, fearfully reach the outskirts
of the sky, (grown) lazy and languid because of pregnancy, as
it were.
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 312 =====
Cutting of Mountain-Wings
15
126. These (mountains ), supporters of the earth, fluttering
their wings for the (last) moment, vanish like moths in the (blazing)
lamp of the thunderbolt, flaming like dazzling lightning-streaks.
127. The mountains, thinning (in their ranks), look very
few in number; their expanse destroyed, they look elongated
(in breadth); curtailed (in size), they look too tall, with their
wings clipped by the thunderbolt.
128. Wings loosely spread out, the mountains are seized
by the rushing thunderbolt; and then falling down (finally) after
a high upward flight, they are unable to jump up even slightly.
129. Thunderbolt strikes the mountains (dhare); mountains
slashed by thunderbolt and coming down, strike the earth; and the
earth, too, hit by the falling mountains, smites Sega's circle of hoods.
130. The mountain-ranges, made sore with their own
pungent smoke, flapping their wing-like eyelashes and shedding
tears of water-streams, burst like the veritable eyes of the quarters.
131. The sides of mountains, with their uneven (thaida)
surfaces of hardened iron-rocks, first flowing out (in fluid condi-
tion) on account of the burning heat and later solidified (samkhaa),
become quite fit afterwards to meet and repel the (blows of the)
thunderbolt.
132. The summit-streams, soiled black by (the ashes of)
the burnt-up wooded groves, prove to be the falling tear-streams
(bahoārā) mingled with collyrium, (from the eyes) of the sorrow-
ing mountain-wives.
133. The broad beds of iron-streams on the mountain-
ridges, with their soft flow (of liquid) now congealed, look in
their lustrous forms like the huge bodies of snakes stretched out
in sleep.
134. A certain mountain, glowing reddish-yellow by the
fire of the thunderbolt and with the moon's (reflected) orb at its
bottom in the course of its upward flight, roved about like Garuda
(flying away) with a nectar-jar picked up (in his claws).
135. Masses of clouds, flying off from the mountain-slopes,
enveloped in the tawny glow of lightning resembling the thunder-
bolt, rolled on in the sky, looking like clipped mountain-wings.
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 313 =====
16
Galdavaho
136. Mountains, meeting the thunderbolt (in its blow), made
their flowers, fruits and leaves look like burning pieces of charcoal,
while the creeper-bowers, (erstwhile) places of love's assignment,
were being mourned for (on account of their loss) by the heavenly
couples.
137. The river-ways, flowing about on the ridges of
mountains, quaking in (the agony of) mutilation, assumed the
appearance of bandages on their gaping wounds.
138. What was seen by the forest-roving animals of the
earth was only the clipping of wings of the mountains, as they
stood (still and stupefied) on their embankments, although they
had come out from the caves in their eager desire to get down (on
the earth).
139. The mountain-wings get scattered about in the sky
in their (upper and lighter) halves, as they go up burning and
start rolling (round and round), while by their (lower) halves,
heavy at the bottom, they drop down on the ground.
140. Columns of smoke, massed up above the trees, having
fires burning at the bottom, look like formations of shadows,
thrown up by the light down below (heṭṭhāloa).
141. Thunderbolt met the heavenly mountain Meru once
again in the mighty flames on its slopes, on account of a suspicion
that its wings were still intact, although they had been lopped
off (before).
142. By its own innate power, the thunderbolt might not
deal such a hard and a fast blow, as it would do (to the extent of)
cutting asunder a mountain, when hit with force by the wings of
another mountain.
143. The billows of the oceans, stirred up by the falling
mountains and lit up by the encircling lustre of the jewels
(underneath), heave high up in the sky, looking like the very
mountains with blazing wings.
144. After a long time does the thunderbolt come out (from
the mountain-side), giving to the gods a feeling of sadness, causing
a crater by its burning action, its flashing lustre lost, being
compressed within their enfolding wings by the angry mountains.
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 314 =====
Cutting of Mountain-Wings
17
145. The thunderbolt would not leave even those mountains
which dropped (themselves) in the sea, although their long down-
ward descent had not yet completed and (hence) their peaks were
to be seen stretched far (and high) in the sky.
146. Only one mountain, however, could (successfully)
submerge, without its slopes, base and top being seen (lhikka)
in the high-mounting waves of the ocean, as in the ocean itself.
147. One would imagine that it was not the mountain that
(entered) the ocean, but the ocean itself entered the mountain
in impetuous haste, flooding in to roll (leisurely) inside (the
region of) its valleys and caves, as huge as the interior of the
nether world.
148. The earth quakes, shaken by the seas agitated by
mountains, its shoulders thrashed by the excited quarter-elephants,
and thus made to oscillate by the mountains wriggling in agony.
149. Mountains move on, as if escorted by the seas, although
they had not reached them, hidden from view, as they
(mountains) were, by their (own) rivers flowing on their slopes
and tossed up by the violence of speed.
150. The dense, smoky mass rarefies, its vast extent at the
base made thin by falling rocks which cover it up (chhavvia)
and the slow (rising) flames being cut off.
151. These very mountains, tossing up a mass of dust and
shaking off big chunks of their caves and valleys, became lighter,
as they were shattered (into pieces) on account of their fall.
152. The mountains languish (in pain) on one side, (pierced)
by the rankling splinters of the thunderbolt's sharp edge, while
on their other side, they had their wounds healed up by the potency
of the medicinal herbs (growing) on their ridges.
153. Not against one single mountain even was the thunder-
bolt seen to fail or falter. The whole cluster of mountains was
(simply) boiled up (attai) like one hill-top.
154. The mountains, having all the blazing fires of the World's
Destruction concentrated in the trap of their folding wings, were
extinguished only at the time of the Deluge, when they were inun-
dated by the oceans' tidal floods.
G. 2
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 315 =====
18
Gaidavaho
155. The same mountain-group, although now lighter on
account of their wings being cut off, became heavy for the Lord
of snakes (Sesa), as they helplessly threw down (the full weight)
of their bodies.
156. The earth disintegrated, the circle of mountains smashed
and the seas pushed far back, the three worlds were (thus) brought
to universal Destruction, as it were, by Indra, longing for peace
and stability.
157. A mountain-couple just gives up life, in the blissful
satisfaction (nivua) for their bodies which could secure a (final)
cold embrace, as the (warmth-giving) enfolding wings had been
burnt-up.
158. There was then an unending, unbearable family sepa-
ration for mountains, who, torn asunder (from one another) by
fear, settled down firmly on the very spots where they dropped,
as a consequence of the cutting of their wings.
159. The thunderbolt (once again) goes up in the hand of
Indra, light in body but gaining in weight (respect) (by the dis-
charge) of its mission, having its sharp edge destroyed in breaking
the tough wings of the mountains.
160. (Such is our King), sitting on one seat with whom,
Indra considers it an honour (Indra) who put the mountains
in a straight and reasonable frame of mind by clipping
their wings.
161. Fine looks the (courtesans') muslin dress, made fra-
grant and pink by the bath-saffron, still clinging to their curly locks
of hair and gorgeous with an auspicious one-flower garland, worn
(by them).
162. The face looks beautiful with particles of perspiration
thinly formed (on it) as a result of the intoxication of moderately
tasted (cakkhia) wines and with rolling lotus-like eyes, languid
and feeble (itthama).
163. Lovely is the expanse of their breasts, cool and sweet-
smelling, on account of the fragrance of Patala flowers transferred
(to them), with patches of sandal paste unevenly accumulated
(in dense layers) on their fleshy parts, (jutting out) from the
tight-fastening (saydina) of the wet (bodice).
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 316 =====
Universal Dissolution
19
164. The eyes roll about, soft and reddish like Mälati buds
besmeared with honey-juice, looking bright with their lovely
roots of eye-lashes, from which collyrium has been completely
washed away.
165. The hips get greatly relieved of pain (w/v) in their
close contact with drops of water dribbling from the dishevelled
blossom-like locks of hair, braised, (as they-hips-are) by the
sprout-like nail-scratches, inclined downwards and closing up
(in the process of healing).
166. (Such is our King) who stays behind to enjoy, in the
pleasure-ponds of his enemies, the pleasure of water-sports,
arranged (simmäa) at the close of the summer day, with a bevy
of courtesans.
And what is more,
167. With the (hidden) streams of the (melting) golden
mountain flowing out of its crevices, the fire appeared to be falling
out from the nether world in big flames.
168. The heavenly grove of trees began burning up, the
(hovering swarms of) bees being screened by the darkness of
smoke, their bunches of tender leaves having been mixed up with
the spread-out palms of the sylvan deities (in an effort to save
them).
169. The moon's orb blazes up in flames, its spot-like deer,
resembling a circling mass of smoke, running away (from it), its
attendant planets having dropped off in the guise of flying
sparks.
170. The group of goblins stood up, as it were, in their hid-
cous forms, although struck by fire, with the fire-flames lolling
out from their cave-like growling (muhala) mouths.
171. The Vidyadhara couple, fully confident of their inse-
parable state, starts burning up (and) the first streak of smoke,
issuing out, looked like a sword-blade grasped in the hand.
172. The buffalo of Yama, enveloped in flames, was swallow-
ed by fire, as if he was his own mass of smoke brought down (to
the spot), after having stumbled against the ends of the universe
(in an attempt to escape).
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 317 =====
20
Gaüdavaho
173. The fire approaches the Lord of gods, trembling in fear,
as it were, its flames fluttering with the breeze set in motion by the
multitude (uppanka) of chowries being waved (over Indra)
by the heavenly women.
174. The fire blazes up in the sky, being stuffed (and inten-
sified) (ividio) by a cluster of lightning-streaks, fully exposed
after the bursting of the mass of clouds and (finally) resulting,
as it were, in the circle of orbs of (twelve) suns.
175. The snakes began burning up, driving far off the fire-
flames by their straight, hissing breaths (sumkāra) and keeping
the emerging smoke pent up in their circle of dancing hoods.
176. Sega holds aloft the circling mass of smoke breaking
out over his back, (looking) like a canopy (viana) of Visnu's
bodily complexion, formed overhead on account of His laying
himself on him (ivesa).
177. Madana (the god of Love) blazed up (and) for the
purpose of finding relief for his (burning) body, possessed by the
flames of fire, he was (found) clasping the neck of the pitcher in
the form of the moon's orb.
178. The fire somehow reached the underground treasure-
spots of Kubera, its emergence being rarefied by the (quenching)
shower of the poison (liquid) emitted by the guardian-snakes.
179. The mass of fire-flames, when their vivid obstruction
was brought about by the bodily halo of the wriggling Väsuki,
looked brownish like a cluster of the slightly loosened matted hair
of god Siva.
180. (The fire) looked like the Son (Kärtikeya) of the
Three-eyed God (Siva), as He stood on the day of His birth, with
all His parts collected together and restrained in the cage of its
fire-flames.
181. (Such is our King) who displayed such playful activity
(against his enemies), assuming the form and appearance of the
enemy of Kamsa (Krsna-Visnu) at a time of the Universal
destruction, when (even) gods were engulfed in the flames of the
destructive fire, inside the cave-like bowl of the universe.
Or rather,
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 318 =====
Widowed Wives of Enemies
21
182. "Why has your hair-braid, graces of which were
inseparably associated with the inter-weaving of a floral wreath
variegated with jewels, now turned reddish-brown like a bamboo-
stick struck by smoke?"
183. "Why has your face, its cheeks (once) looking like
the counter-part of the digit-full moon, become darkish and smoky
grey, like a Damanaka tuft of blossoms?"
184. "The lip you have, which (once) was so sweet and
stuffed with beauty, is now turned unevenly reddish and rough
like a fresh Kandala shoot, enveloped by particles of dust beaten
down by a shower."
185. "This your expansive ear, we see now becoming tremu-
lous like an erect Laval! leaf at the mercy of winds, unadorned as
it is, by auspicious ear-ornaments."
186. "The self-same broad surface of your breasts, garbed
like an eternal (full) moon or a jewelled jar, has dropped away
its encircling garland and finds now no occasion (and scope for
an application) of the sandal-paste."
187. "The Ibvely complexion over your limbs, bright-yellow
like a bunch of Kadamba filaments freshly bursting in a blossom,
wears now the lustre of gold, dulled by a long lapse of time since
its production."
188. "The same pair of thighs which before had a white
shining look, rendering its comparisons with the tusks of young
elephants absolutely inadequate, has now, we observe, become
loose and insipid like crushed lotus-stalks. "
189. "Alas! young woman, why do you have such red,
colourless feet, like old (anava) and broken bits of a Karcūra
plant, looking like dull-lustred lotuses thwarted in the process of
their full blossoming?"
190. "This retinue now moves about, with the dignified grace
of their dress losing all its brightness, having been worn a long
time, and thus looking dusty like old paintings."
191. In this way were the beautiful ladies of his enemies made
to weep (rujjamti) by their friends who, not having known of the
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 319 =====
22
Gaidavaho
mishap of their (recent) widowhood, saw (and said) what was
appropriate for their affection (for them).
192. Then, with the Coronation Ablution (ceremony) done
for him, he started on his expedition, at a time when the magni-
ficence of clouds disappears, having firmly fixed (in his heart)
the ambitious resolve (Vanasaa) of the conquest of the whole
world.
And this is what happened:
193. Here comes down from the sky a mass of tender leaves
from the heavenly trees shaken by gods, magnified (karāla) by
the pollen of blossoms and resounding with clanging (paroppa-
ravadana) jewels.
194. A breeze over the heavenly path blows lovely by its
fragrance (obtained) from the slight-opened Mandira flowers.
cooling to the throats of heavenly nymphs, exhausted by auspicious
dancing.
195. Simultaneously (Samas) with the King's (march),
the huge pillarlike trunks are lifted up by the quarter-elephants,
(to present) as it were, arches of uncommon, excellent jewels,
(for his welcome).
196. The moon with a second halo (parivesa) formed
(round him) by the encircling arms of rapturous Rohini, became
invested with a bracelet of propitious planets.
197. A band of heavenly beauties moved on, with their plump.
rounded breasts, resonant with the jingle of jewelled necklaces falling
on one another in a graceful embrace, keeping time, as it were.
for their dancing steps by the beat of cymbals (kansa).
198. There was an onward movement on the part of the
under-ground Treasure-Troves too, with their upper surfaces
uneven and bristling on account of the big, darting (urvella) gems
(underneath), and with dark screens of fumes from the poison-
fires of attendant snakes, fatigued by the lustrous rays (from the
treasures).
199. The great Indra, even at the time of great joy, has his
thousand eyes, dimly opened, soiled, as they are, by the fragrant
powder (väsa) getting in them, when scattered by rejoicing fairies.
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 320 =====
The Victorious March
23
200. The firmament-canopy has victorious buntings of
foliage fastened on arches, as it were, as the horses of the sun's
chariot found themselves suspended over the impetuously uplifted
trunks of gods' elephants.
201. Thus was the world of gods, who brought about the
magnificent festive celebration on the occasion of the king's com-
mendable march, their happy hearts being carried away by the
thrill (of the event).
Moreover,
202. (The standing pose) in which the creeper-like left
thigh (completely) crossed (turned) over, up to its very base (hip).
the other slender (right) one, presenting to the view only one big
breast, as the body, slightly swerving round, stood oblique,
203. (In which) the garland receding (sideways) met, with
its ends, the curving line of the fleshy hips and the creeper-like
hair-line (on the stomach) was uplifted, being drawn out clearly
on (the surface) of the thin waist, which stood out (in a promi-
nent view) on account of twisting (of the body),
204. (In which) the moon-like face was turned and rested
down upon the right fore-arm placed on her friend's shoulder, the
sprout-like palms of each of them united in a clasp, as the fingers
were closely intertwined,
205. (In which) half of the breast was decorated (amjia)
by a big and straight braid of hair turned over (on it) and the
brilliance of the crest-gem became manifest when the parting line
of the hair (on the head) was bowed down (bandhura) in grace.
206. (In which), as the (right) ear was bent low, the view
of the ear-ring became obscured by the shining 'creeper-blos-
som ornament manjari) of gold (tavasijja), while the other
(left) ear-ornament rubbed (or blended with) the saffron-paint
on the bosom, which it reached, when turned sideways.
207. Thus did the standing grace of the city's beauties look
charming on the terraces of their houses, when their decorative
lotus-like eyes moved about for a sight of the King.
208. (The moon's friend) whose eyes, when he recollects
even to-day, his bewilderment (caused) by the coiling mass of
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 321 =====
24
Gaüdavaho
flames from the fire of Siva's wrath, suddenly turn away (in fright)
at the sight of even an Asoka tree of brownish blossoms.
209. That friend of the moon (Cupid) even, having seen
these women, verily makes the faces of his own beloveds (Rati
and Priti) disfigured with anger, their broad cheeks being dis-
coloured and pale, like the bunches of Kunda flowers.
210. In the case of these women, too, perspiration (came
out and) stayed on their bodies, discoloured by the sandal pigment
through which it broke out (aviddha) and looking variegated
with its mass of profuse drops all over (the body).
211. His eyes were fixed on the faces of these fair ladies,
besmeared with sandal paste and painted with the yellow Gorocans
pigment, as on silver plates (full of sandal and yellow pigments)
on auspicious days.
Moreover,
212. "In battles, Laksmi, posed (seated) on your sword-
blade, had a glimpse of you, as it were, through the interstices of
a door-panel (studded) with blue gems, after having tossed away
(padipelliūna) the enemy's sword."
213. "Lakami, who, fond of vice and ever residing on the
sword-blades of warriors, has become dark (-complexioned),
as a result, as it were, of the iron-rust being injected, now flashes
clean and bright with you."
214. "By your forehead with its upraised (knitted) eye-
brows, as if infused with anger, oh King, all foreheads (of other
kings) are levelled down (in a bow) on the path of homage."
215. "By kings like you (more and more) pre-eminent in
later succession (in posterity), this Race (the Bamboo tree) has
prospered in growth in an inverse order, as it were, with reference
to its topmost part."
216. "Religion appears charming, like a chamberlain
(sovidalla) by the side of your beautiful (beloved), Royal
Glory, as it has advanced (in age and progress), securing strength
and stability by means of the Staff (punishment) utilised (on
occasions) on the path of movement."
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 322 =====
Praise by Bards and Poets
25
217. "Laksmi holds over you a veritable white chowrie in
the form of your mass (ugghäa) of fame, with its handle of gold,
as it were, in the form of your extending prowess as the basis (of
fame)."
218. "Huge heaps of your glory are seen lying scattered about
in all directions, giving an appearance of piles of broken bracelets
of the multitudes of widowed (vihardanta) wives of your enemies
(slain by you)."
219. "We still remember your (tu) sword with its flashing
rays of pearls (extracted) from elephants (mäamga) in war,
looking very much like a lotus-stalk planted (utta) in streaming
water, of the Goddess Laksmi, ever fond of her abode in a
lotus-plant."
220. Having launched upon the vow of giving protection
to the affrighted, your sword, I believe, has now no scope even
against the host of your enemies, distressed, as they would be, by
fear (of you)."
221. "Your enemies' backs, observed in curiosity (and
wonder) on the battle-fields, were stroked by you placing your
hand on them in appreciation, as they bent down to bow at your
feet."
222. "Every day, the Goddess Laksmi stays on your sword,
capable of breaking open the temples of a mighty victorious
elephant, solely with a desire, as it were, to collect a treasure of
pearls."
223. "There exists not a single man, O Lord, who would
(wish to) take up (nehii) the watery drops of mercy from your
eyes to your forehead (above in wrath)."
Or rather,
224. "The earth became (very heavy) for Sega to bear with
all his efforts (adara), when depressed under the weight of the
multitude of mountains, compressing their bodies in their zeal
(ādara) to fly up."
225. "Up in the sky, the clusters of mountains with the sun's
orb revolving inside underneath their wings, looked as if they came
in contact with (Indra's) thunderbolt, yet to come (descend on
them)."
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 323 =====
26
Gaidavaho
226. "Up went the mountains (in the sky), slowed down
(in speed) by the heaviness of caves filled with winds, and their
peaks thickly screened by trees spreading out (in size) on account
of the velocity (of mountains)."
227. "The mountains ascend in the sky, with their broad cave-
mouths illumined by stars, moving unsteady, as they are, being
dragged about by winds (set in motion) by their respective
(flapping) wings (pekuya)."
228. As the mountain Himalaya did his graceful flight, dis-
charging frosty showers, the people started to shiver, feeling dis-
tressed by the (unexpected) sudden (acch( 1th )akka) onset
of winter."
229. Obscuring the sky in their flight and at a high altitude
looking small when the sky came out in view, the mountains
suggested that the sky (kham) is, as it were. meagre (and small)
(madaha) at the bottom but huge and extensive at the top."
230. When these great mountains flew up very high and
when midway, the spray of the cascading streams vanished (from
sight) (atthamia), they looked astonishingly small, having (as it
were) lost their huge bodies (forms)."
231. The roaring violent wind, thick and heavy, having
been (so long) pent up, fills whatever sky-pocket the flying moun-
tains vacated."
232. "The mountains fly upward, their thick, dense shadows
receding from the sides, reforming in conformity with the passage
of their lower base and then gradually diminishing, while the streams
of ichor (dana) on the quarter-elephants, flowed down from their
wings."
233. "Flocks of birds, being swept by the opposing upward
winds facing them, are forced to fly up a little; but they come
down again and perch on the mountains dropping down from
the sky."
234. "The forest-groves, with their shadows quick-moving
as the light of the sun's rays changed its area (of illumination,
corresponding) with the receding movement (of the groves),
appeared thin and sparse, their foliage (umbrella) having been
upturned by the (wind's) velocity."
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 324 =====
Praise by Bards and Poets
27
235. "The great Indra even, who had clipped the wing-rows
of these mountains getting in his (thunderbolt's) range in the
sky, nodded his head in admiration at the thought of this King
(going on his expedition)."
236. "The Goddess of Victory seen (saccavia) on your
sword, the pearls from elephants' (temples) closely clinging
(samdatta) all along its blade (asudharam) has, as it were,
manifested herself only by her necklace slightly exhibited in grace-
ful dalliance."
237. Your glories, mingled with the (black) ignonimy of
your enemies, are held (on their persons) like Malati garlands
interwoven with petals of blue lotuses."
238. "The kings' circle,
solely centred in you like the
mighty with their prowess and
planetary ring in the immovable
(amucchitta) polar star, moves round and round."
239. "On the battle-field, only your sword flashes bright in
your hand, which thus attains the lustrous beauty of the spot on
the moon's orb in the form of your glory."
240. "We curse ourselves for not being Arjuna (i. e. Sahasr-
arjuna with a thousand arms), or great Indra (with a thousand
eyes), or Väsuki (with a number of ears), since (in our present
body) we are incompetent (apajjatta) to do homage (with more
than two folded hands), to have your sight (with more than two
eyes), or to (hear) your eulogy (with more than two ears)."
241. "Your sword comes down on the enemies, with its sharp
edge (dharagga) enveloped in a cluster of (ignited) shooting
fire-sparks generated by its impact (on the armour), drawn
(towards them), as it were, by their hostile circle of planets."
242. "Against your enemies dwelling somewhere in fear and
misery (avilasa), even the Odd-Arrowed God (Cupid) does not
draw his bow, considering them cowards, as it were."
243. "On the battle-field, frightful by the twanging sounds
of bows pulled by warriors, you (tan) happen to be closely
embraced at once by the Goddess of Victory, filled with fright, as
it were."
244. "Charming does the Goddess of Victory look in her
unions with you, employing your (ru) sword like a blue lotus on
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 325 =====
28
Gaidavaho
her ear (to extinguish) the rows of lustrous lamps in the form of
your enemies of great valour."
245. "Your sword verily, O Lord, has multiform blades, since
your enemies collapse (and go down on their knees), being
frightened away even (at the sight) of another's plight (wrought
by your sword)."
246. "They are not fire-sparks that fall out from your sword
striking the armours; but this is veritable gold, which the
Goddess (residing) here (on your sword) emits to succour the
supplicants."
247. All your (diplomatic) missions (kajjälm) are
successfully accomplished just by your fore-finger, a veritable
female envoy of your mighty, massive arm, when (it is) raised
and held erect, though quivering, (kaakampan) as if in anger."
248. "You have so ascended on top of the world, elbowing
out (others) on all the sides (pasaakkamena), that only the crown
(on your head) looms (over all) like a dome (on a mansion)."
249. "The spot of musk (maa), transferred to your shoulders
by your beloveds, looks like a mud-remnant left over in the
discharge of your duty of bearing the earth's burden."
250. "The thick concentration of red lustre, gathered from
the blossoms of red rubies in the ear-ornaments (of your ladies),
flashes bright on you (your face) like an imprint of red lac-dye
from the foot of Laksmi constantly roving over your eye-brows."
251. "The supplicants, in the act of homage (at your feet),
are happy and satisfied, as they ascend (in their reflection) the
serried steps of your lustrous toe-nails, (feeling) as if they have
entered the caves of reddish jewels."
252. "Laksmi lies concealed inside your sword under the
guise of the fire-flames discharged by its blows on the armours (of
enemies), looking as if (she is) wearing (her husband's)-Visnu's
garment, exchanged (by her for her own) in her flurried
arrival.
253. Thus is (he) who is praised for merits, which are facts
(bhattha), by bards and great poets, with their throats becoming
painful and (voices) faltering at the flood of joy.
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 326 =====
Horses on the March
29
254. Thus was exit made from the city by the King whose
fame had (already) gone ahead, his charming exploits, like (those
of) the moon, having been broadcast (samcaria) by his flattering
(cadu), witty bards.
Horses on the March
255. His marching steeds, whose whirling movements
(avattagalo) were executed (perfectly), just because, perhaps, (they
had) turned and twisted about inside the embryonic homes of
the vital wind-breath named Java-Pacamana,
256. Who, with their hoof-prints reddish like saffron
blotches (marked) on saffron-coloured surfaces of the tracts,
betray the enjoyment of the Earth by her Lord, characterised by
fresh nail-marks (left on the beloved Earth),
257. Who, with their neighing sounds produced by the thick
(Samkhāṇa-samkhyana) lumps of foam at their mouth-ends,
appear to be the conchs of march, as it were, being filled with wind
(blown),
258. Who, with the magnificence of a multitude of emeralds
in ornamental decorations (äyäna), emit a hundred-fold (or
quickly) (sayaraha), as it were, through their limbs, the fresh
grassy juice, taken in (by them),
259. Who, with their well-formed hips, very much like a
clearly demarcated middle (central) line, possess, as it were,
well-laid channels (panali) for the water of perspiration to
flow out,
260. Who, with their hooves with chisel-like, pointed edges
(tanka) falling deep (and sharp) with great strength and speed
on (soft) roads, write, after (first) uttering, as it were, the syllable
'T' (z),
261. Who, born on the borders of the mountain Himalaya,
as they are, quiver on the spot, in the powerful exhuberance of
their mettle, experiencing, as if, even to-day, the shivering caused
by the healthy (apagha) cold weather (of their native land).
262. These (such) victorious horses, with numbers of
warriors mounting them, marching in waves in front of the great
King, suggest, as it were, the great joy (they feel at their participa-
tion in the King's campaign).
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 327 =====
30
Gaidavaho
Elephants of the king's army
263. (The elephants), who with their big trunks held over
after being gracefully twisted, offer to Laksmi a pillow, as it were,
(to rest upon), as She lays herself on the couch of their
huge tusks,
264. Whose nail-pieces (on their toes) appear to be, even
to-day, fragments of skulls imbedded (khatta) in the sides (of
their feet), because of the fact that they had crushed the
enemies' heads with their feet, turned and twisted (in the act
of crushing),
265. Who, with their triple streaks of ichor flowing in a
zig-zag grace, arrange, as it were, Laksmi's hair in a fragrant,
graceful, creeper-like braid,
266. Who drink, as it were, the blood-water of their rival
elephants, completely floored by them and laid by their sides
(pasallia), with the help of lovely lotus-stalks, as it were, as
the pointed tips of their tusks were thrust in the sides (of the dead
elephants),
267. Who, with their flapping ears, soft and hairy like whirl-
ing chownies, look charming, appearing as if (they are) on flutter-
ing wings, (wishing) to fly up with the idea of (having) a fight
with heavenly elephants,
268. Who, with the watery streams of their ichor, give every
day (an indication of the farthest limits of advance) by fixing a
tape on the ground, as it were, for his expanding Royal Glory.
269. Such victorious elephants of the King, with their darkish
skin-colour hidden under the spread of white powder (siapittha).
march ahead of him, like clouds whose blackish aspect is taken
away by the season of autumn.
270. And now came with their charm (agghanti) little by
little (i. e. gradually) (winter) days, the swans cackling at mid-
night, the lotuses getting only slightly oppressed (with heat)
(dumia) and the sun's light bereft of its bright strength (asūra).
271. The compact nights have sparse clusters of white lotuses
on ponds (küsüra), moon's halo, unruined (unbroken), but pale,
thick frost and cold mornings.
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 328 =====
The Winter Season
31
272. The sun's rounded orb, reddish like Alambusā blossom,
reels in the sky, not finding (full support of) its rays and paled
in lustre by the influx of mist (tusaralamhha).
273. The village-borders look lovely with their cool water-
spots, with the notes of curlews (herons) and cranes uncurtailed
and with the fragrance of paddy (kalama) pounded at the thresh-
ing floors (khala) wafted about.
274. Whom would not the forest-fringes captivate,
enveloped, as they are, in the smoke (emitted) by cattle-farms,
the dry cow-dung cakes (karisa) made blackish, being covered
up by thick mist?
275. A herd of cows (rolljäha) goes out somehow with
a dull step to enjoy the mild heat of the sun, with their hips un-
shivering, (having had) the happy comfort of the heat of (burn-
ing) cow-dung cakes permeating (through their bodies).
276. Thus casting his eyes on the village-borders prospering
in the cold season, the Lord of the earth (King) reached gradually
the territory distinguished by the Sona river.
277. The outskirts of (several) villages, blooming (beaming)
with fresh paddy crops and pools of water, getting red-coloured
by the betel-nut shells dropping (in them), were trodden by the
soldiers of his army.
278. Their eyes rested on the border-lines of water-reser-
voirs (teeming) with intoxicated ospreys, the waters (in them)
rippling with flashing fish and possessing clumps of reeds (vam-
Julinisu) (in between ).
279. Their hearts felt restful (and happy) there (to see)
these out-skirts, with lovely waters inside the unsullied (clean)
reservoirs and (beautified) all round (a) with fragrant paddy-
fields putting forth their blossoms.
The Vindhya mountain
280. (The Vindhya mountain) where ascends the sun's
chariot with great difficulty, with its yoke pushed upward, the
tawny mane on the shoulders (of its horses) tossed up by the
yoke falling back (on it),
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 329 =====
32
Gaüdavaho
281. Where, for those who go out, there is an impression
that the sky does not exist at all, (the vision being obstructed by
mountain-ranges overhead), while to those staying inside the deep
caves, (it appears) that the mountain itself does not exist,
282. Who, with its ridges full of many a cavern, appears
to have been manufactured, by taking (as raw materials) half
of the earth and half of the sky and then placing it in between the
sky and the earth,
283. Who, with his peaks penetrating the sky and the sky
spreading through the caves, has screwed up and steadied, as it
were, the surfaces of the sky and the earth,
284. On this Vindhya mountain, with elephants pleased and
happy to get bits of Sallaki plants full of fragrant juice and with
thick-growing palm-forests, the King went up.
Praise of the Presiding Goddess of the Vindhyas
285. "The arched entrance (of your temple), O Madhavi,
is embellished with strings of bells snatched, as it were, from the
whole family herd of the Buffalo-Demon, captured by you."
286. The head of the Buffalo-Demon, filled with the
brilliance of the toe-nails of your feet, is seen to be a foot-stool,
as it were, in the form of a block of snow placed by (your father)
Himalaya for helping you to ascend."
287. "The rows of bees, O Bhairavi, over the perfumed
courtyard of your temple, hover about like dangling chains of
creatures released (from worldly life) by a prayer alone (offered
to you)."
288. "Indeed, at your (mere) recollection on the battlefield,
masses of elephants disperse from a distance, being put to flight,
as it were, by the roar of your vehicle, the Lion."
289. "How could your devotees, O Candi, falling in line at
your lotus-like feet (in prostration), be bound over by Yama
when he would be, as it were, carried away (from them) by his
buffalo, scared (by the memory) of the killing of the Buffalo-
Demon (Sairibha)?"
290. "The mountain Himalaya, by reason of his being your
father, has been elevated (in status and dignity); so, too, is
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 330 =====
Praise of the Vindhya Goddess
33
mountain Vindhya, O Blissful Goddess, by the grace of (your
having accepted) a residence in its cave."
291. "Very nice and charming you appear, O Nārāyani, in
your residence (temple), when strolling about, the flocks of swans
collect at the jingling sounds of your anklets, (evincing) a passion,
as it were, for the cemetery strewn with skull-bones."
292. "Physically only, you stay in just half of the body of
the Crescent-decorated God (Siva); in his heart, however, O
Sankari, you have complete, undivided scope (to occupy)."
293. "The Buffalo-Demon's horn was pulled out (broken)
by you (with a kick), as it forcibly extracted (from your foot)
the circular (kundala) jewelled anklet (rulikofi) and placed
it as a ring, as it were, on the (remaining) broken part of his horn."
294. "Your door (of the temple), with offerings of blood
placed at various spots, appears to be strewn with the pieces of
(the body of) Sandhyä, slaughtered by you in your jealous
resentment against (your Lord) Siva."
295. "The night-falls, when columns of darkness are pierced
through by the shining light of your face, appear, O Divine Goddess,
like huge buffaloes being offered (to you) by some (devotees).
296. "You alone place (simesi) your (light) step on the
eyes of the people in the form of sleep; since, on awakening, their
eyes look (red), as if filled with the red lac dye (of your foot)."
297. "If, O Kāli, you had not brought about the dissolution
(of the world), how could there have been such a gorgeous decora-
tion of garlands of skulls on all the bodies of your infinite forms?"
298. "You are praised by men, who, that very moment,
find their iron (greed) chains snapping, (leaving behind) black
necks, like Siva's characteristic marks, since they attained the
status of His followers, as it were."
299. "Not even for a second, your temple-park is left by
the peacocks, out of feelings of affection, as it were, for the pea-
cock of Kartikeya, near at hand."
300. "Always drinking in (inhaling), as it were, columns
of the smoke of incense at sacred offerings, you vomit out this
thick darkness in the form of nights of the dark fortnight."
G. 3
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 331 =====
34
Gaüdavaho
301. "You look beautiful with your bosom luminous with
the rays of sapphires in your garland, as if with a cage made out of
enemies' swords, kept off (antaria) for the protection of people
bowing (in devotion at your feet)."
302. "When you flash out in the form of night, the moon
playing the part of (resembling) the skull, that time the circle of
planets makes for the decoration of human bones."
303. "If you had not turned the serried rows of the demons
swords into blue lotuses (inclined at your feet), how could have
been the ceremony of the worship of your lotus-like feet carried
out?"
304. "You shine with your bosom between the two breasts
besmeared with the wet, red sandal paste, as if bleeding, (being
pricked) by the thorns of the garlands of Bilva leaves."
305. "The blood-streams spurting through the outlets (paths)
made by your trident, O Forest-goddess, (piercing) the body of
the Buffalo (demon), look like the triple course of your (three)
eyes flushed red with anger (when) rivetted on him."
306. "The inner hall of your temple, O Goddess, darkened,
as with black collyrium, by the lustre of swords and daggers
(asidheyu) gifted by warriors, leaves the owls even during the
day, free from fear."
307. "You are (every day) worshipped by (your devotee)
the Night with offerings of rice-grains resembling the stars, having
first made an offering of a dripping head, as it were, by means
of (in the form of) the orb of the setting sun."
308. "You shine, O Gauri, in the midst of watery clouds
in the shape and form of lightning, as if you have been (Yasoda's
divine daughter substituted by Devaki) flying up to the heaven
along with the death-dealing stone-slab placed by Kamsa (for
striking dead on it Devaki's new-born children)."
309. "With the lustre of the jewel-like toe-nails overspreading
the red lac dye, blending with sweat (caused) by the touch of God
Siva, your foot looks beautiful, as though the crescent moon, the
Gods' river (Ganga) and the twilight have (combined) to bow
at your feet (along with the head of Siva.)"
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 332 =====
Praise of the Vindhya Goddess
35
310. "The stone-slabs (of the pavement) here, with their
inside reflections of the red banners, are licked by female jackals
under the mistaken fancy of the flow of blood from the easily
available (animal) offerings."
311. "The reflected images of the various creatures (at your
feet) in front of you drink in, as it were, the saffron paint washed
down from your forehead in the act of worship-bath, expecting
the gratification of drinking blood."
312. "(Even) in the state of sleep your form cannot be
observed even by gods, the functioning of their eyes being impaired
by the closure of their eyes, dazzled by their having direct vision
of you (in the wakeful state)".
313. "How indeed, could you have, O Ascetic Goddess,
(practising penance to change your complexion from black to
white) cultivated regard for the restraint of breath (exhaled and
inhaled), with your sighs increasing (beyond normal proportion)
at the time God Siva (insulting you) turned away from you
(calling you a black woman)?"
314. "The sighs of Siva, produced by your graceful move-
ments of dalliance, are now heated and tormenting (samtävino)
on account of a feeling of repentance for burning the God of Love,
looking as if they (sighs) have drawn (in themselves) the fire
from His eye on the forehead."
315. "The breezes, ever blowing at night-falls, fluttering the
ever-burning lamps in the conclaves of the perfected devotees, give
comfort by the happy fragrance of incense at your festivals (sava).
316. "Flashing in the form of lightning on the edge of a
mass (kūḍakoḍi) of watery clouds, you look charming (like your
own self) flushed red with anger, while overpowering the Buffalo
(Demon)."
317. "You cause a flutter (of fear) by means of typhoons
(vaudung), as if with evil goblins, keeping the whole court-yard
awake (during night), dusty and hairy, as they become, when they
grab (in their virulence) heaps of hair offered (to you) by people."
318. "The dimmed rows of lamps in the deep interior of
the hall, O Goddess, reel and falter, as if blinded by the darkness
of the hair of offered heads."
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 333 =====
36
Gaiidavaho
319. "Your female worshippers (of the Kaula sect), going
up one over the other in their excitement to see the great beast
(Man) being slaughtered, construct, as it were, a house of per-
fumes in the air."
320. "With your feet, characterised by people bent down
(at your feet), looking very much reduced (madaha) in size
in their reflections in your jewel-like toe-nails, you look beautiful,
O Mother, being bowed, as it were, by thumb-sized gods
(Välakhilya)."
321. "These thousand arms of yours with their multifarious
equipment and weapons, are a mere appendage (parlara) to
that one arm of yours, O Goddess of excellent thighs, when
lifted up to grant boons (to your devotees)."
322. "Your temple with its multitudes of freshly red-lustred
stream-like banners, throws out all the blood, as it were, drunk
every day (taddiasa) from the decapitated heads of animals
(sacrificed in your honour)."
323. "The cloud-like smoke-coil, issuing from the fire of
your third eye, looks lovely, as the tongues of Vasuki (encircling
the neck of god Siva) assume the grace of lightning flashes."
324. "The very foot, which was planted on the Buffalo's
head culminating in his death, richly serves as an auspicious source
(of bliss) to the people."
325. "In your maidenhood, for the propitiation of god Siva,
a veritable Bilva sacrifice, as it were, was done by you, with the
help of your tiny breasts on your heart inflamed by love."
326. "You possess a body conspicuous with dripping human
mouths clinging to one another, remaining loose (and disjointed)
even now, by reason, as it were, of the dislocated, dangling bones
(of your body) battered by Kamsa."
327. "The branches of trees in the cemetaries, at night, red
with pieces of dead (human) bodies (kunava) suspended on them,
suggest the highest heroism of warriors in the act of selling human
flesh (to get success in their undertakings)."
328. "In your greed for a big (chunk of a) bone full of
gravy, your tongue, O Candi, turns and twists over the lustrous
rows of your teeth, tinged pink with the lower lip's lustre."
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 334 =====
Praise of the Vindhya Goddess
37
329. "Revati (Camundi) moves ahead of you, her body
naturally gaunt and dried-up, (indicating) as if her flesh is lost
through fear of human bodies ever present here."
330. "You are worshipped even by trees, with an offering
of their own blood, as it were, (flowing) from their hacked arms
(branches), red with sap exuding from the cuts made by axes."
331. "Even cocks (or peacocks), turning the (entrance)
path muddy with blood, fat and hair, dropped (on the ground)
in their mutual fights, obey your comands, as it were."
332. "You strike terror (diba) even with these pillars
decorated with cloth dyed red, prominently displaying, as it were,
circular heaps of flesh (from animals), butchered for your offering."
333. "Your carrier corpse, indeed, makes itself (strong
and) capable to bear you, its strength being brought about, even
in its dead state, by its body which can easily breathe."
334. "Charming you look, in your night-forms (in association)
with the temple-deities, pouring out from their mouths extraordinary
blood-streams, being fanned in devotion by red banners, as it were."
335. "The dark nights, by your association, O Goddess,
develop shoots (baddhamkura) as it were, in the form of the
buffalo-horns and put out sprouts, as it were, by the out-stretched
necks of peacocks."
336. "The blue-bodied (meaakuya) Sabara couples look
charming, gaining a dark complexion, as it were, by their reflections
in the rows of copper (loha) mirrors."
337. "It is only your form as a Black Night of Destruction
which is dreadful and frightening; your heart, however, is evee
affectionate with feelings of compassion."
338. Thus was homage, with requisite ceremonies (sapariara)
of worship, paid by the King to the Divinity dwelling in the cave
of the Vindhya mountain, the way (to the temple) being directed
by Sabaras clothed in mere leaves (tammi.dala).
Thoughts at the sight of a dead body
339. "Is it that even now flares up the flush of the fire of
anger within the spot of his heart, although the bony skeleton is
browned off by its longtime (decay)?"
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 335 =====
38
Gatidavaho
340. "Death has, as it were, engraved lines of the knitting
of eye-brows for (depicting) a laugh on its forehead, teeming with
vermin-clusters produced in its joint."
341. "The dust on the round face, turned in curling knots
in the absence of any ointment (olimbha), wears an appearance
of thickly besmeared sandal paste (to alleviate) love's pangs."
342. "Alas! The lovely head that (formerly) was fondled
and caressed when lying on his beloved's arm, (comely) like a
bamboo sprout, rolls now on the slope of an ant-hill which forms
its pillow!"
343. "How strange is this glossy transformation of the
(lovely) braid of hair into a hollow skull, thickly matted with dry
grass, sprouting from its interior filled with mud!"
344. "Alas! Alas! This row of teeth, overspread with
greenish dirt, gives a trembling, as it were, as if emitting (even now)
the juice of many a betel chewed (before)."
345. "By the presence of bees' feathers (here), it appears
that His blossom-darts were discharged by Cupid (even on this
dead body), the feathers having been separated (from the arrows)."
346. "For him, (dead as he is), the whole world becomes
at once enveloped in impenetrable darkness, inspite of its having
still the rising sun, the friendly moon, the burning fire and the
lustre of jewels."
347. Thus did the King grieve for long, filled with emotion
and (indulging) in various fancies of discriminative thought,
greatly softened in his mind at the sight of a human corpse there.
348. (The peacocks) whose big, sloping plumage with its
spreading brilliance, bristles out from within, as if tinged with the
lustre of the gems of cobras eaten up (bahutta) often.
349. The notes of these peacocks delight him (on the banks)
of streams flowing on the slopes, soiled by mountain-smoke,
(shaded) by trees becoming scarce by the (encroaching) fields
of Bhils (pulinda).
350. In the forest-tracts, (infested) by elephants, he sees the
tracks of their herds, bristling red with bits of Sallaki plants, as
if with filaments, (thrown out) after being eaten up.
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 336 =====
The Summer
39
351. The practice (joggu) in the skill of encircling enemy-
heads was being done, as it were, by his victorious elephants, as
they stretched up their trunks to smash lumps of palm fruit.
352. The hill-paths became strewn with the fire-sparks
(phulinga) of his wrath, as it were, dreadful (as they looked)
with clusters of tiny Gunja fruit, dropped (virikka) by the fright-
ened Bhil women running away.
353. Under the guise of peacock's feathers worn on their
ears, the feathered (kaapattaya) arrows in the form of glances,
as it were, are cast at the King by the Sabara women.
354. The Lord of Magadha moved away, creating by magic
a screen of dark night (tami) over his face, as it were, as he darken-
ed the whole expanse of quarters by a thick layer of elephants'
rut, in fear of the King.
355. The tracts of land, flickering (in the heat) of summer,
with peacocks, restless and languid, (resting) in the afternoons,
and charming with green forest-groves, give to the King a peculiar
feeling of uneasiness.
356. The earth warms up, oppressed by summer, with thick
heaps of chaff (busa) falling in showers and then clearing away,
the ponds made muddy upto their bottoms and (grassy) sprouts,
rare and withering.
357. The mountain-rivers falter along (in their courses),
their currents being slowed down on rugged land, fragrant (as
they are) with bits of fresh sprouts (roha), their water cooled by
the fall (oyära) of icy flow in it.
358. The landscapes (disübhol) greatly appreciate (in
charm), their loveliness emerging on account of a surrounding
belt (pariara) of blue forest-ranges and their villages (looking)
white with a covering of newly-laid thatches.
359. Even in summer, the mountain-slopes (lamba),
develop an overgrowth of lawns (saddalia) in the forests, because
of the sprinkling of water by windy (stormy) showers at evening,
thus (looking) as comely and delicate (as they do) at the commence-
ment of the rainy season.
360. Then the rivers flow in turbid currents and the breezes
get fully (paljatta) surcharged with Kadamba fragrance. The
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 337 =====
40
Gaidavaho
youthful exhuberance of the rainy season thus drops down
(descends on the earth), without its pompous array (dambara)
of clouds.
361. The travellers pass off their summer (night) sleeping
inside the temples, cooled by the holy ablutions of Siva's linga
(during worship) and filled with the fragrance of the Kadamba
and the Arjuna blossoms wafted inside (dha).
362. The days are lovely, the city-roads being heated, while
the sun's orb is overcast with hanging clouds; the heat of summer
is confined to the earth, while (the clouds of) the rainy season
stand suspended in the sky.
363. And then (navari) the sun's rays developed a misty
appearance, (as) at the close (pariņāma) of summer, as if showered
by the spray of rut falling from the victorious elephants of the King.
And this is what happened:
364. The eyes turn away, contracted by the bright, dazzling
light (outside) which could not be endured, having come out
from inside the house, after a long time, reddish and languid
(as they are), when rubbed after a break in the sleep.
365. The hips, adorned by a fragrant garland of Bakula
flowers, attract (attention), with fresh nail-marks (on them)
caused by a bed of tender Tamala leaves crushed underneath.
366. The creeper-like arms, with cool forearms, as the
bracelets of lotus-fibres were tossed away, look charming, being
moistened with water and besmeared with sandal paste.
367. The (graceful) whirling movement, with anklets
fastened on the feet interspersed with Campaka flowers resembling
new, tiny golden bells, captivates (the eye), sweet and charming
(as it looks), when the soft (silken) dress is thrown up.
368. The broad bosom gains in loveliness, fragrant with the
residue of the sandal paste over pinkish nail-marks, (the fresh
skin formed over them) being removed in the act of a close embrace
and bedecked with a garland of Kalamba flowers (looking) varie-
gated with their petals.
369. The charm of an ear-ornament, consisting of an inner
(yellowish) Ketaka petal, emerges (in its loveliness), as it clings
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 338 =====
Tha Talk of Soldiers
to the reddish, flushed cheeks mingled with the intoxication of
small quantity of wine (taken).
41
370. Thus moves about on terraces a bevy of beauties, with
their vigour diminished as a result (of the heat) of summer, the
surface of their cheeks cooled down by a few drops of water
(sprinkled over).
The talk of soldiers
371. "The days now are lovely, the sun's orb (becoming) pale
(vicchiya) and brown on account of a co-mingling of lustre and
clouds, the breezes cut off, (looking) greyish and dusty without dust."
372. "Here blows a breeze, rippling (tarangia) with the
swinging branches (of trees), through which (protrude) the crests
of peacocks with their uplifted necks (ukkantha) and made noisy
by the falling of showers on the thick Jambu fruit."
373. "Here emerges a mass (patthäri) of clouds, half of its
interior darkened by what little (dara) water they had drunk,
thus looking greyish like an elephant's ear white at its tips
(peranta)."
374. The ascetics pass their days here on the sloping
embankments of the mountain, with blossoming Arjuna trees in
front, surcharged with the deep fragrance of Kutaja flowers and
made pleasant by showers."
375. "The forest-grounds here look beautiful, bristling
(kasawva) with the Palasa fruit, soiled with fine sands and making
noise when ejecting water (under trampling feet), and appearing
darkish even when slightly sprinkled (with a shower)."
376. "These days, when breezes (become scarce and) have
to be looked for, and getting warmer after a shower, (are conducive)
for ripening of the mango-groves".
377. "On a day dulled (heavy) by showers, the family
houses (inmates) delight in the smell of fat, coarsened by dust
falling out from the heated granaries (kusüla)."
378. "The forest-tracts here, dense with lotus-plants varie-
agated (sura) with their fruit, becoming thin and sparse by wood-
cutting (activities), have their grounds browned off by the drying
(via) Kadamba trees, left standing only on their stumps."
"
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 339 =====
42
Gallḍavaho
379. "These Southern women, with their bound tresses of
hair scented by fresh Ketaka flowers, look beautiful in their
turmeric pigment, whose yellow brightness is heightened without
effort (having the same natural complexion)."
380. "How and why would not Cupid, who conquers (only)
with his fine, flowery bow, flash forth (triumphant) all the
more, having obtained (additional aid) of the bow of Indra
(rainbow)?"
381. Such were the talks of the army people, made soft and
tender by longings of love (ukkamtha) possessing their hearts
and telling the characteristic symptoms of the season.
382. The sweet-throated song and sleep in a (quiet) uninhab
ited place, when (for a long time) no sleep was to be had, were
a great solace to the heart filled with (love's) longings.
And what more happens?
383. The earth's surface dries up, its mountain-slopes being
heated, the bulbous roots sprouting on the borders and the dust
thickening in clods on account of light showers.
384. The rivers now start flowing their waters, yellowish
and undrinkable, splashed by showers, the cranes (balia) picking
up the floating fish.
385. The rivers reel and falter (as they flow), the dried-
up, muddy moss-tufts overflooded by yellowish water and the
fish (in the stream) difficult to spot out by the water-hens.
386. The beauty of the plantations of water-melons (väluki)
drops away, with the shrinking of ashes (serving as manure),
their tender fruit at (different) spots being encircled by the
canopy (vina) of brownish creepers scattered about.
387. Though washed by new (muddy water) and breath-
ing shallow through their mouths, the flock of fish does not move
away (to another place) in the pond, their bodies having become
heavy with mud, (which they collected on them) in their meetings
with other fish.
388. In the sky-region, lovely by the manifestation
(vivesa) of a rainbow looking like a strip of lawn, there moves
a curving line of cranes resembling a herd of (white) cattle.
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 340 =====
Advent of Rains
43
389. The sky, partially bespangled with the lustre of deep,
greenish rainbows shooting up, looks picturesque, as if it has been
made multi-coloured (sabala) by the plumages of peacocks, who
have taken to the air in a pleasant mood of satisfaction (as an
effect of showers).
390. (A) As the thick column of dust (rises up), being dug
out (ukkhaa) from its base (on the ground) by the speed of the
summer gusts of wind, the surface of the earth manifests itself like
the flattened skull of a tortoise.
390. (B) The hooded cobras tolerate the first fresh showers,
although their rounded hoods smart (dümia) under the smiting
streams (falling on them), since their cool touch is very much
solicited (maggia) by them on their bodies, being (constantly)
heated (payavijjanta) by the fire of their own poison.
391. The rows of ponds look lovely, bringing the mountain-
ranges, whose dust is allayed, much nearer (to them) and darken-
ing the herds of elephants.
392. The lustre of sugar-cane (crops) flashes forth just
after the first shower, looking blue as the dust is washed away,
although they have gaps formed (viraluddesa) and the twigs are
browned off in several spots because of the summer heat.
393. The ponds look lovely, their inside (walls) collapsing
although well-built, the water becoming whitish in places where
the stalks were rooted and the pink Kaseru grass at the bottom
quivering.
394. The forests have their tree (-tops) stirred (rankholia)
by winds from the clouds and with a cool, green verdure (growing
underneath) at the base; the Udumbara fruit becomes insipid (and
tasteless) when beaten by showers.
395. A rest (continued) for a long time is enjoyed by travel-
lers underneath the cool-shaded trees, noisy with (chirping)
birds, delightful (as they are) with sandy mounds (nearby) by
the side of rivers full of rippling water-streams.
396. The frontiers (of villages), with flocks of intoxicated
quails (moving) inside the beds of Himst creepers, with white
patches inside formed by the fresh Varanaka grass, develop a charm
fit for observing from house-tops.
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 341 =====
44
Gaidavaho
397. The borders (of villages) look lovely with slightly
yellow (daragora) rice-fields, moistened with drops of fresh water
boiling in the heat (of the sun), with tracts of land (in between)
appearing greyish like the backs of young tortoises.
398. The surrounding parapet-wall (varana) of the wells
with its soft, upraised border, bristling with its bluish pieces of
stones (masonry), thoroughly cleansed of its mud, appears to
have diminished (onaa) in height, as the water came in (to fill
the wells full).
399. The lands had rice-fields ripening (rosaftamina) with
what little water they could subsist on (lit. drink) after the rains
had stopped (viricchea), being filled with the fragrance of Musta
grass chopped by the ploughs.
400. With fresh clouds (filling the sky), the days appear
to have just begun, although the sun has risen high, while even
when the (day's) end was far off, (it appeared) as though they.
are about to cross over (the setting time or the setting mountain).
401. Quite a peculiar charm (develops) for the bordering
regions (near water), that could be noticed in their (various) vivid
aspects when herds of cattle have moved nearabout, the paths
(leading to them) being hidden deep (gahīrāamāņa) in the grass
that heaves up (and covers them).
402. The nights present a brighter twilight glow, when the
gurgling sound of the mountain-rivers doubly increased (in
volume) and the shrill notes of crickets (and such other insects)
go on continuously.
403. The cities look pleasant, with their smelling (uggandha)
soiled grounds, producing a bright, yellowish glow (up above),
the notes of musical instruments being carried over longer
(distances) by the peculiar (pattering) sound of the rainy day.
404. The nights present the scene of rain-water being drained
out in noisy streams over the roads when showers have ceased,
while (up in the sky) clouds are observed in their distinct demarka-
tion (vihangão) when illumined by lightning flashes.
405. The frontier-lines (of villages) have tender shoots (of
grass) obscured by (crowding) insects (kida), marshes and ponds
made muddy by showers and flocks of Sarati birds squatting in fields.
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 342 =====
Advent of Rains
45
406. The sky becomes overcast with massive clouds, the
forests have their Arjuna trees pressed down and drooping on
account of showers; and the dark-blue nights, with the moon,
bereft of the pride (ahankära) (of his lustre), do attract.
407. In the rainy season, the earth sinks, the sites (pivesa)
of river-banks sagging under water, thus looking as if it (the
earth) has been tossed away (from his head) by Sesa, when he
himself was being fashioned into a bed (talimattana) by the god
Visnu.
408. The beauty of the forests in the rainy season has to be
observed only from a distance, since the ground underneath the
trees is full of high grass (tapailla) and the water of the ponds,
muddy and warm, is unserviceable.
409. The villages, with their groves of trees discernible only
at their tops because of the upheaving overgrowth of grass (ava-
roha) on the forest-borders, appear to have sunk, as it were,
enveloped, as they are, by the coiling columns of smoke.
410. The jasmine flower, with its (encircling) petals drooping
(being beaten) by showers and half of its filaments soiled and
slight-smelling (asurabhi), gets loosened from its stem where
alone it ripens.
411. The forest borders, which delight trees and with cool
breezes (blowing) after a break in showers, gladden the heart (by
the sight) of the herds of cattle, returning by their paths on land.
412. The forests develop denseness (bahala-bhiva) with
their thick (ibida) groves of trees and with the tufts of grassy
lawns heaving up (sasia) in their close (siramtara) growth, thus
appearing as if they are being (moved and) massed together
(pumjlijantal).
413. And then it looked as if all the four quarters are having
their Nirajana (waving of lights) ceremony done in honour of
the King through some one, just in the rainy season, when streaks
of lightning start flashing round in circles.
414. The group of kings looked radiant (with valour) as
they returned, and (joined) the Magadha king turning away (in
flight from the field of battle), looking like a cluster of (blazing)
fire-sparks from a column of a meteor.
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 343 =====
46
Galiḍavaho
415. The surface of the earth, gory (Bamba) with the conti-
nuous flowing lines of blood of soldiers battered at the very start
of the battle, looked as if it was strewn with scattered, coiling streaks
of lightning conducted (down to the earth) by shower-streams.
416. The wide expanse of the sky, ( emptied) of its clouds
pushed out by the gods' chariots and reverberating with the deep
boom of drums (beaten by gods) in the heaven, (sent down) thick
showers of the Mandara flowers that fell (on victorious warriors).
The King's Conquests
417. And then, after having gobbled up (Kavalinna) the
fleeing (valanta) Magadha monarch (i.e. killed him), he
marched on through the outskirts of the sea-coast forests smell-
ing fragrant with cardamom (elu).
418. His rambling in the cocoa-nut forest-ranges, reddish
with gems, studded with stones heaped in masses on the shore,
and sweet-smelling with split (cocoanut) fruits was a pleasant sight.
419. (Of the Vangas) over whom the sun, red-tinged
(ravia) as red lead, (soared high) flashing from the victorious
elephants' temples crashing (against one another in a combat),
does not leave, even when risen high (in the sky), the pink glow
of (dawn) when the night had ended,
420. The faces of these Vangas, washed clean (viccholia)
(and white) with the lustre of his toe-nails, turned pale, as it were,
by the feeling of (shame and) embarrassment caused in their first
) attempt to) bow down in homage (at the King's feet).
421. The Lord of the Earth moved on, casting his eyes on
the forest-lands, bristling with pumpkin gourds and with herds
of deer squatting unconcerned.
422. At the time of whose march, the earth shakes (and
trembles), distressed in her belly, as the ring of jewels on the hoods
of Sesa is thrust (in her inside) by the pressure exerted by the
heavy weight of the army, thus appearing as if she has (her son)
the planet Mars (situated) in her womb.
423. The Lord of the Earth, to whom a cordial salutation
(as an indication of homage) was made by the southern king,
marched ahead along the path over the Malaya mountain.
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 344 =====
The King's Conquests
424. He (Ravana) who looked up to the face of (Siva)
the Enemy of the Odd-Arrowed (Cupid), favourably disposed
for the grant of a favour, with his eyes upturned (uttuna) and
rolling, having seized (his own hair with his hand) in his devo-
tional zeal to cut his own heads violently (to make an offering
of them at His feet),
425. On whose (Ravana's) broad neck, the wounds inflicted
were hastily made painless with a sprinkling of nectar from the
moon on His crest, by the Bull-Emblemed God (Siva),
426. By whom (Ravana) were observed the charms of his
nine new faces, perfected by the grant of a boon (varühi), in a
jewelled mirror presented respectfully (before him) by the left
half of His body (viz. Pärvat!),
427. By whom (Ravana), not very eager for the whetstone
(Sa), was felt in full satisfaction (pariutthe) the sharp edge of
his sword Candrahasa, marked, as it was, by a thick layer
(punja) of his own powdered neck-bones,
428. Whose (Ravana's) arms were massaged in astonish-
ment with his own soiled hands by the Three-eyed God (Siva),
spotted with mud, as they were, from the base of the Kailasa
mountain, when he balanced it (on his hands) and then put it
down,
429. In whose (Ravana's) interior halls of the palace, the wind
blows in the discomfort of a slow movement through fear, although
unimpeded (viraggalany) by the sighs of captive gods.
430. Our King reached that part of the ocean, where, thrust-
ing such a mighty Ten-Faced (Ravana) in his armpit, Indra's son
(Välin) had at one time, roamed about (on an excursion).
431. The blackish flood (uppila) of blood, gushing up in
anger on the red, round faces of the Pärastkas, comes out simul-
taneously with the blows (of swords).
432. The pool of blood (ruhiravicchadda), manifest on the
ground which stood coagulated (vifthia), as layers of dust (on
this ground) were excavated by the excited (trampling) of the
army (soldiers), appears like the refulgent lustre of jewels on
the hoods of Sesa (now exposed to view).
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 345 =====
Gaidavaho
433. Streaks of ichor are ejected upward through the tiny
apertures of their temples by the elephants, as their natural (down-
ward) speed (of oozing) is blocked by their own trunks, colled
up in the act of striking a slanting blow (pariņai) (of the tusks).
434. By soldiers, who tightly shut their mouths with their
lower lips, angrily (pressed and) pulled in with the help of the
(upper rows of) teeth, resistance is offered to the life departing.
as it were, while still the Master's mission remained uncompleted
(unaccomplished).
435. The female jackals hoarsely (yelling) scamp about,
their mouths agonised in their zeal to gobble the parts of dead
bodies with darts imbedded (in them), their (shrill) cries being
widely spread over drops of blood.
436. The battle-field looks as crowded as at the start (of
the battle), even though the soldiers have been routed (scattered),
striking terror (dimba), with the dead bodies (runda) of men
(riders) stuck up to their (dead) horses in their swollen condition.
437. The victorious elephant, with splinters of (the mahoot's)
hook flying out from the gaping wound in the frontal joint of his
temples (ärakkha), goes on shaking his mouth (head), thinking them
to be (a hovering swarm of) bees disengaged (from his temples).
438. The same armies, with bodies scattered (palhartha) all
over, lifeless and (hence) heavy, had become (a burden) unbear-
able for Sesa (to support).
439. Thus was a great, fierce fight of the King with the
Parasikas, which resulted in heavy destruction and climaxed in
his victory.
King Pṛthu Measuring the Earth
440. The mountains, situated near both the seas (Eastern
and Western), although (uprooted and) made to move away with
their second half of ranges, came in (to the same place with their
other half) and covered up as much area as they were made to
evacuate (nijjamti) (when pushed back).
441. Even as only one mountain, that covered up the whole
world, was dislodged (and set aside), the whole earth, re-esta-
blished in its full aspect, started coming into full view.
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 346 =====
King Prthu Measuring the Earth
442. It appeared (saijai) as though these mountains,
thrown aside (payolliä) and (therefore) tumbling in this direction,
are now pressing and pushing (sollenti) the rounded surface of
this earth in this as also in the other direction (east and west).
443. The whole multitude of mountain-ranges, being forced
aside by just one mountain clinging to the bow-end piercing (and
penetrating its side), is being driven along (vijal), filling, as it
does, the intervening space with massed columns of dust.
444. It looked as if broken bits of splinters of the mighty
thunderbolt, which had remained imbedded (at the time when)
their wings were cut, are now dropping down from these mountains,
(when we see) streaks of lightning crashing down from the clouds
over their embankments, being (powerfully) pushed (by Prthu's
bow).
445. The mountain-masses are being driven along, their
bottoms grating, their trees and water-streams set in motion,
big boulders tumbling down, (the mountains rising and falling)
in waves, as they cross over even and uneven surfaces (of the
earth).
446. These lofty mountains, proceeding onward under the
forceful (driving) pressure of the bow's tip, are being smashed
by quarter-elephants (äsägaa), suspecting (them to be) their
rival elephants rushing (to attack them).
447. The mountains, with their wide expanse of bases stuffed
with boulders falling from their tops in the course of their move-
ment, are observed to have fresh (new) water-streams, gushing
out from outlets bored by the bow (-end) thrust inside.
448. With their bases fully occupying the (area of the) nether
world, these mountains, tilted up on the bow which pierced and
came out (on their other side), were gently released (and lowered
down), after having been balanced (on the bow) for a short while,
for fear of demolishing the earth (by the thud of their sudden fall).
449. The currents of big rivers, which were formerly formi-
dable with the pooling of water over the (slopes of) mountains,
have now become thin streams of water and are being absorbed.
by the low-lying lands, from where they (mountains) are vacated.
G. 4
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 347 =====
50
Gaüdavaho
450. The places from where the mountains were removed
and the places where they were lodged by the King-both these
(places) looked quite different (now), having (completely)
altered their appearance.
451. The cluster of mountains, having been displaced from
the central region and placed on the borders, the sky (vault)
appears to have descended down to the earth, while the earth
ascended the surface of the sky.
452. The same sea, now remaining in its diminished (madaha)
expanse, (its water) having been collected on one side by reason
of its being filled with mountains driven by the bow and
dropped in it, appears to be unusually greatly populated by
aquatic creatures.
453. The day shone with full light (bahalaava) (of the sun),
which at first had missed its brightness, but later, when the moun-
tain-cluster was set aside, (became) fully manifest, (becoming)
concentrated (pumjaia), as it were, only in the middle of the earth.
454. The earth's surface appeared to be unevenly rugged,
with all that cluster of mountains thus situated, and its other
(adjoining) continents far elevated (in height), because of the
(abysmal) hollowness of the land, from where the mountains were
excavated.
455. The courses of big rivers, overlaid by the earth thrown
over as mountains (began) moving, emerged into view after a
long time, having been made muddy by the dust getting soaked
in water.
456. Greater offence (damage) was done to the mountains
by their enforced movements than by (the outrage of) their wing-
cutting, after which they had been happy at having obtained
stability and having grown (in due time) forests and grass.
457. The earth's surface, with an encircling ring (parivesa)
of lofty, heavy mountains constituting its border, appeared to be
deeply depressed in its central region, although, in fact, only its
two sides were weighed down (by mountains).
458. The earth's surface, getting enfolded by its borders
heavily bent down under the huge weight of mountains (placed
over them after) being removed, appeared to have greatly dimi-
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 348 =====
Love-sick Narmads
51
nished (in size), although (in reality) it had (reclaimed) bigger
areas of extension.
459. Tributes were collected by the Master even from these
border areas (bhi peramtā), although, indeed, (they had become)
inaccessible by mountain-ranges, thickly placed together
(ibidikaa) by the propelling force (pellaya) of his bow by Prthu.
Narmada river as a love-sick maiden
460. The eyes find themselves fixed on the rows of swans,
which, in their established familiarity, come dribbling in
(samgalanti) at (hearing) the sounds of jingling anklets, as she
(Narmada) moves about in a mood of distate (and displeasure).
461. Her bright, lovely complexion appears to be changing
to a darkish shade, by reason of constant interruption in her
happiness, thus having, as it were, the colour of ichor flowing out
a little from (the temples of) forest-elephants (vivineha) as
they stand (in the current) to enjoy a bath.
462. Parts of her body become yellowish-pale in spots
where the sandal-paste is applied (to give relief) in her agony
of love's torment, looking as if her sandy mounds are exposed (to
view) because of her debility (as observed in her thin, trickling
stream).
463. Often times, her restless bodily activities in the form
of waves (viivavāra) terminate just in her heart, (which is) greatly
agitated (allola) by (longings for a) union (with her lover), the
pleasure of which is relished in day-dreams conjured (ghalanta)
in memory (saisuhüsüa), (but after a time) lost.
464. Her body (river-bed) attracts attention by (the
swarms of) bees hovering (ghonanta) over (spots full of) fragrance
(produced) by the crushing of her flower-bed, her head, which
fully occupied a particular spot (on the bed), being easily discer-
nible to people.
465. Recollecting this legend, the King dwelt in the same
place where roamed Narmada, who had fixed her love on that
royal sage (Kartaviryārjuna).
Nectar-jar coming out from the ocean
466. (The Nectar-jar) being sipped, as it were, by the
Lord of Snakes with his thousand, very long tongues, having glided
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 349 =====
52
Gaüdavaho
(to it) under the garb of clusters of fresh, auspious sprouts placed
on its mounth,
467. Being courted, as it were, (for a grant of favour) by
the old, imprisoned gods with many a bow, thus resembling the
white chowries being waved over it (nectar-jar) by the attendant
guards,
468. Being resorted to, out of their fondness for fragrance,
by clusters of bees, as if by the crowds of creatures (scorched)
black with anxiety (caused) by the fear of death,
469, Shining by its side, resembling its own halo of lustre
and thus looking like the round head of Rahu, which remained
full of life, even when cut off with His wheel by Visņu.
470. Our Master stayed on this sea-coast, where the gods
(stood) in wonder to see the white nectar-jar coming out from
the ocean.
471. He left (behind) the paths over Marudeśa where great
elephants happened to be killed by haughty lions in an attack
(sampita) (on them) and where (water of) small wells was made
turbid by his armies, crowding (to draw it from them).
Janamejaya's Serpent-sacrifice
472. The directions with black, thick tails of comets fore-
boding impending (homta) dread for the nether world, appeared
to be full of snakes fleeing in fear.
473. The path of the sky, strewn with flickering stars as a
result of the portents occurring at that moment, appeared to be
(glittering), as it were, with hood-jewels, being offered to gods
(as a bribe to save them) by the frightened cobras.
474. Thickly covered (kalilä) with clusters of the straight
(bodies of) lordly snakes wriggling out of the mouths of circuit-
ous holes, it appeared that the (Lady) Earth moved (in fright),
as it were, with her upraised locks of hair in the fury of bewilder-
ment.
475. Strips of sloughs in rows were cast off by serpents,
suffering from (premature) old age through panic, being afraid,
as it were, of being speedily burnt up.
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 350 =====
Janamejaya's Serpent-sacrifice
53
476. With the coiling columns of smoke, getting mixed up
with snakes incessantly (atthia) falling (in fire-flames), the
sky, too, appears to be (one with) the nether world, turned into
one single oblation (in the sacrificial fire).
477. The great snakes, sprouting (pallavia) with the throbb-
ing clusters (kalappa) of their tongues, doubly red (punarutta)
through bewilderment, appear to be angrily swallowing the flames
of the (sacrificial) fire.
478. The fire, with its swinging flames, noisy on account of
the hissing sounds (sumkāra) of the multitudes of burning snakes
appears to be breathing out heavy sighs, as it were, while slightly
(giddy and) reeling through the effect of the virulent venom (of
snakes).
479. The female cobras, trailed (pațiaggia) by the red glow
of jewels on their pink, spread-out hoods, drop themselves (in
fire), wearing signs of decoration, as it were, in their endeavour
to die (soon) after (their mates).
480. The snake-beauties encircle (valaamti) (in an
embrace) the fire-flames without the slightest feeling (of fear),
although their bodies were (accustomed to be) fondly caressed
(in embrace) by the golden twigs of the fully-flowered Hari-
candana trees.
481. With his belly fully stuffed with coiled clusters of
burning snakes, it looks as if the fire has his own circling entrails
bloated and wriggling after his feast (on serpents).
482. The fire-flames, multi-coloured, because of the lustre
of the various types of snake-jewels, appear to be containing within
them the bow of Indra (Rainbow), coming down first before Indra
himself was made a sacrificial offering.
483. His feet grasped with twisted hoods by the king of
snakes who came for refuge, the Lord of gods trembles (in fear),
as if mounted on the ladle dispatched (to the heaven to bring him
down as an offering in the fire) by the angry king (Janamejaya).
484. Our Master stayed long on the way in the vicinity of
the suburbs of the city of Srikantha, where the descendent of
Pandu (Janamejaya) performed the Serpent-sacrifice (in revenge)
for the murder of his father.
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 351 =====
54
Gaüdavaho
485. (In that lake) wherein the king of Kurus (Duryodhana)
was dragged out (akkhitta) by the son of Pandu (Bhima), (catch-
ing hold of) the skirt of his armour (kavaa) which reached his
hands, in the manner of an aquatic creature found in (the fisher-
man's) net.
486. In that lake, water-sports were indulged in in the
company of his beloveds by the king-a veritable young elephant
of the Bharata (-varsa), remembering all the time the Bhārata
conflict (between Pandavas and Kauravas).
Bhima rails at Duryodhana
487. "You are a fool, O king, wishing (thamta) to restrain
Madhava who, by virtues (chords) of the magnificence of His
Mays, has enthralled the whole world".
488. "The row of flags, O king, seized by the victor (Arjuna)
in his fight with you (when you attempted) cattle-lifting, was
a veritable (mirror) reflection of Draupadi's garments (removed
from her body by Dusiñsana) in succession."
489. "Quite fit and proper (it is) that you slapped your
thighs instead of (lit. leaving off) the shoulder Cowards, whose
strength lies in their legs, place great reliance on their thighs."
490. "That you stood at that time completely drowned in
sweat flowing (on your body) was (an occasion) for a practice
in plunging under water."
491. In such a place where Bhima, reminding (sambharia)
him of his lapses, made his enemy (Duryodhana) suffer pangs
(by inflicting crushing blows) on his thighs at day-break
(vihaa), our Master displayed (acts) of mercy.
492. (In that region) where the snake (Kandapuccha),
emitting the sparks (of his own) poison-fire, as though (they
were) splintered particles of the crest-jewels (in the crown) of
Arjuna, was not made an arrow again (for the second time) by
Karna.
493. Where his own armour (which had become one with
his) skin, and which, although peeled off (ukkatta), appeared to
have, for a moment, still remained (on his body in the form of)
horripilation (produced) by the joy of (granting ) a favour, was
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 352 =====
The Flying City of Hariscandra
55
gifted away by him (Karpa) to Indra (approaching in the disguise
of a brahmin).
494. In that region, where the chariot-wheel of the great
chariot-fighter (Karna) tore into the earth, striking stories
deseribing without a break (heroic events and incidents) of many
a king are (being told).
The Flying City of Hariścandra
495. The sky itself, now deprived of Generality, (peculiarly)
became the curved rampart (for the city), its differentiation (from
the rest of the sky) being observed by its frightened citizens, coming
out only on balconies.
496. The snakes, recoiling from (the path of) descent, as they
observed clear, open space through the breaches (cracks in the
subsoil), stayed put, huddled in fright, just in their holes.
497. The mansion-terraces, having their upper halves
torn as under because of cracks developing through the force of
(the city's) upward flight, appeared somehow renovated, as it
were, with their other halves remaining intact.
498. The wells, with their (feeding) springs uprooted, as
their support of the earth-surface (subsoil) was cut off, became
dried up (racchatta), developing (deeper) hollowed depths.
499. The treasure-jars (buried underground), half exposed
(to view) by their broken bits of chains dangling (midair ), hang
about suspended at the bottom (of the city), in the graceful style
of big ringing bells.
500. The eyes of (loving) couples, ever remaining big (and
wide open) because of their recent cessation of winking (action)
are painful (to observe), deprived, as they are, of dalliance
(aviläsäim) even at the pleasure (of each other's) sight.
501. The lodgement of the city becomes only lighter
day after day, as its (supporting) earthy foundation is gradually
crumbling on account of the wind's (violent) movement.
502. Even during nights (on the earth), awakening (from
sleep) occurs for the citizens, who still feel languid (and lazy) in
their (deep) unbroken sleep, since in the course of the city's
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 353 =====
56
Gaüdavaho
upward flight, they reached the border-line (from where eternal
light) of the day begins.
503. The potters' houses (of pot-making industry) obtain
somehow, day by day, lumps of clay, rationed in quantity (and
meant) for their preservation only, because of (shortage due to)
the inaccessibility of the earth (material).
504. As the moisture (rasa) in the earthy foundation began
gradually evaporating, getting dried up by the sun's heat (beating)
at its bottom, the earthy foundation (of the city) became full of
dust and loose at the bottom, remaining (moist and) cloggy only
on its top-surface.
505. Even with a (celestial) park (full of trees) of heavenly
branches and juicy blossoms and fruits (nearby), the earthly
trees (of the city) were (favoured and) fondled (by the citizens),
because of the bond of their first (early) friendship.
506. Even when the earth's surface had darkened (sāmäamta)
with the enveloping darkness of the night, there was day only in
this city, because of the overspreading bright light of the sun.
507. Thus (in this part of the country) where went up (to
the heaven) the city of Hariscandra, with its whole retinue
(parlarasaha) (of bipeds and quadrupeds), rallied (round him)
through the (superhuman) prowess of the king, as also with the
trees and temples,
508. In that place, savouring of the fame of many a mighty
monarch accepting (permanent residence) as he came (jahugama),
a (magnificent) mansion of gods (temple) was built up by our
Master just within one day.
509. (The Mandara mountain) at whose foot (-hill) the
lines of gold (incised) by the armlets of Kesava (Visnu) are still
preserved, the people, even to-day, touch with their foreheads (in
obeisance), rubbing their fingers on its rocks (nearby).
510. Observing the thick blue shade of the peaks of this
Mandara mountain, His Majesty received at this place the presents
(brought) by the rich country-folk.
511. The prowess of the King who took (ahilenta) (for his
march) the (North) direction indicated by the Lord of Yakṣas,
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 354 =====
Scenes in Nature
57
became specially unendurable, like (the bright heat) of the hot-
rayed (sun).
512. The tracts over there appeared to him appreciably
charming, perfumed (as they were) by the juicy exudation (oozing)
from deep cuts on Devadāru trees and rendered cool by the frag-
rance of fresh wines extracted (distilled) (imunahia).
513. (Here is) this lake whose shore-lines (are shaded)
by the watery Kadamba trees in full bloom and are teeming with
flocks of gallinules (jalaramku) chirping sweet in intoxication
in the clumps of reeds.
514. It (the lake) holds huge mass of water, having the look
of the sea meeting (the lake) for a sight (of his daughter) Laksmi
residing in the forests of lotus-beds, having over-run (over-flowed)
the ponds of the nether world.
515. Here are some lake-spots with their whitish border-
lines, as clusters of lotus-leaves are upturned by the female
birds (vihaavahu), the lotuses becoming tattered, stale (jaratha)
and standing on stalks jutting out, with very few (virala) leaves
(left underneath).
516. The breeze here spreads the fragrant smell of the Jambū
trees, which have put forth cool, tiny buds and (spreads) also the
honey-juice of lotuses.
517. Here are these tracts that look lovely, as the cries of
swans get blended with the sweet, throaty (notes) of the intoxicated
geese and the clumps of Nicula reeds are penetrated by female
cranes (balā).
518. Here the fragrant smell of the crushed knots (of the
fibrous lotus-roots), heavily thickened by the juice exuded from
their broken bits, saturated with muddy, heavy drops of water
flowing down from their apertures.
519. Here the beds of forest lotus-plants, thickly overgrown
with an uneven placement of leaves curled upside down (ukkhitta)
as they sprouted out one after another, rendering the movement
of wild cocks (kukkuha) (halting and) faltering.
520. Vain cries (of failure and frustration) from ospreys
(kurari), hovering over in the sky (to catch fish), emanate here
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 355 =====
58
Gaüdavaho
on the pools of water, (thickly covered) with leaves of lotus-
plants kicked up by the gambolling (uvvatta) fish (underneath).
521. Here these bordering areas of the banks (of lakes)
where crows fall upon (to feast on) worm-riddled (kiḍailla), de-
hydrated, flattened frogs and where tiny conch-shells (or snails)
and moss are (gathered in nets) and drawn (to the bank) by
fishermen (Jalla).
522. The wind here flutters the leaves of lotus-plants, the
roots of which are reddish like trunk-tips (karagga) of elephants
and which are slimy (picchila), having been smeared (phuda)
with thickened foam.
523. The lotus-plants here have their lotuses (standing)
at the far ends (peramta) plucked (by people), the stalks jutting
out (avvatta) high above the little water (left at the bottom).
while their thin (madaha) leaves are entangled in grassy patches
on the banks.
524. These mountains with forests at the base overridden
by clouds, the lakes with vocal birds and woods, void and tranquil,
soothe the heart, as it were.
525. Here are sandy stretches (in the beds) of rivers, soft
and smooth (masinä), the sands being fixed firm in wavy layers of
mud, with Kasa blossoms few and far between.
526. The villages here, situated on the outskirts of lakes,
give very light sleep, being harrassed (uppittha) by the dinning
sound-waves of the cries (kallola) of many intoxicated birds.
527. The grassy plots, their first (layer of) grassy growth
rendered colourless and soaked (alumkhana) in mud by the onset
of flood, have now put forth fresh tufts of grass coming out (over
the old layer).
528. The marshy tracts (vocched) are pleasing and comfort-
ing in the evening, when cackling wild cocks have gone out of the
lotus-beds and the grassy patches remain lukewarm (thounhäamta),
swarms of mosquitoes having flown away (ummasaa).
529. The foot-tracks of rhinoceroses (vidima) here are (a
mixture of) black and white, (being covered) with the powder of
tiny conch-shells (pounded under their tread),, the ant-hills
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 356 =====
Scenes in Nature
59
(vamalara) (on the wayside) made soft and loose by the friction
(caused when they rubbed their bodies against them), and the grass
growing uneven (on patches of ground) in between their foot-prints.
530. Here these grassy tracts, cooled by the watery smell,
(emanating and) spreading (pimmahanta) from the Nicula
blossoms on the banks, with sands on their borders mostly compris-
ing small shells (faņusutti).
531. The waterlines, with moss (ghagghara) formed
(on the surface), have (flocks of) ospreys constantly engaged in
(chasing) female fish, while inside (the water) tufts of grass
(saddala-sih) are to be seen with lotuses of deep fragrance
(ahigandha).
532. The days in the infancy (beginning) of autumn are fine
with blue meadows (all round in villages), while (in cities) first
shoots of grass, sprouting through the interstices of stones
(masonry), fade out (completely).
533. The lands on mountain-slopes (kanthi) here are bristling
(bandhuria) with date palms, (bending down) under the load
of ripened, red fruit (dates, coupled) with the strong fragrance of
Karamanda fruit.
534. This forest-grove here of Karira trees, brownish with
blossoms with their outstretched filaments, looks beautiful,
(appearing) as if it is intertwined (jadila) with the hair of camels
plucked (from their mane) and sticking to the trees in the act of
rubbing (their bodies against these trees).
535. The heart finds relief, as it were, on the paths (going)
over the forest skirts, being filled with the fragrance of sun-
plants in full bloom, (carried) by breezes, along with the fragrance
of lotuses mingling with it that very moment (ava).
536. The village women (gämelä) here do not collect
from forest-lands cow-dung cakes, discoloured and unfit for fire
(feeding) (ahulsea), thickly covered, as they are, by the saline
substance (lidhusa) absorbed in (lit. licked by) them.
537. Here are these pond - beds, over which is diffused the
smell of cow-dung trampled upon by wild buffaloes (plunging in
them), their water turned tawny-coloured by the saline particles
(sa) washed (into them).
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 357 =====
60
Gaüdavaho
538. These forest-lands, giving out a nice fragrance of
their soil, which (becomes) brownish, (having been mixed) with
dry, greyish cowdung (karisa), rouse uneasy yearnings (at the
thought that) the herds of cattle (had stayed and now) migrated
from them (uvvuttha).
539. The forest-outskirts, with their surfaces green with
the fresh sprouting of needle-like grass shoots, look beautiful,
the grass having grown and taken root (vaḍdhiarudha) after
having been grazed upon (cinna) by bulls.
540. The forest regions, with their temple-sites painted
in mineral dyes, and with wild cocks (bhüsü) hanging about in
close vicinity, indicate the fact of the herds of buffaloes, resting
there (parivuttham).
541. The jackals approach a bony skeleton (kamkäla).
of a buffalo through the scared, thinning (ranks) of herons (or
vultures), while the crows, having moved away (from it) in
fear, group together in another direction.
542. The rays of the sun here, with the manifestation (siha)
of mirage (maatanha) on lakes, becomes frosty white, looking as
if they (rays) become crooked and curved because of refraction
(valasa) over (a mass of) upraised (tulia), rippling (tarala)
water.
543. Cool breezes, (stirred) by big waves, indicate the
(location of) watery places and their directions, (surcharged
and) soiled, as they are, by the powdered (chunya) particles of
water, whipped (dhua) by (flapping wings of) the flying birds.
544. The travellers here (somehow) with great reluctance
drink from rivers their waters, the foremost portions
(nearer the sands) of which are contaminated by sands, (tossed
up and) falling with hissing sounds (phukkära) (in the water)
on account of winds blowing with speed.
545. The villages, at evening time, with warm (umhala)
shades of trees and with obstruction caused (to the free movement)
of winds by the dust raised by cattle (on their return home),
become more hot with the coiling, broiling (bhattha) fires (burning
in home-kitchens).
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 358 =====
Scenes in Nature
61
546. Here (is) this forest with thickets of Devadāru trees,
dried up and shorn of branches (visäha), being broken with their
heavy trunks by the elephants and girdled by (a grove of) greyish,
sparse Sallak! trees.
547. Here passes by a herd of elephants, their young ones
hoarsely grunting, having been entangled (samkalia) in (clustering)
creepers, their females recoiling (in fright) and their leader (look-
ing back) with only a (majestic) turn of his face (head).
548. The big trees here, giving stamping strokes (madda)
to the ground underneath, as their close, foremost ends of the
branches are lopped off, suggest the fact of a herd of lordly
elephants resting there.
549. Here are lands fit to roam about (bhamiavva), (where
we have) speedless (ajava) big boars, the enemy, and the ferocious,
wild beast (tiger) killing each other (avaroppara) and rare finds
of Ruru horns,
550. Birds here fall upon (samvajjanti) the fruits (grains),
standing upon the stems (vidava) of wild rice-crops with their
slender (pavirala) roots remaining, after (much of it) having been
collected (savaggia) by the ascetics.
551. Here the birds, with their flight impeded (padihaa)
by the groves of trees, their tops having been enmeshed in a thick
network of creepers, fly out oblique (tamsay) and then take to
(valagganti) the sky.
552. The lions here shake off the swarms (kaappa) of bees,
sent into flight by the blows (with their paws), from the masses
of their manes, heavily (glued) by the liquid of rut of the elephants
(whose temples) are violently cleft (by them).
553. The forests here, with peacocks noisy (with their cries)
and looking reddish with fresh Paläsa blossoms, attract in a way
indescribable (kimpi), as they develop a yellowish look by the
dry (avväa) (waterless) ponds.
554. The pond-beds situated in the neighbourhood (pari-
vesino) of Palasa trees, (that are) rendered cool by the spray of
water-particles (splashed) by waves (jhilli), captivate (the eye),
with a few Kimsuka trees standing conspicuous in the centre of the
water-less zone (asalilamajjha ).
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 359 =====
62
Gaüdavaho
555. The grounds here, with their road-strips hardened by
(layers of) soft earth carried by winds every day, become even
on (occasions of) whirl-winds (suoli) covered with a very thin
(layer of) dust.
556. Here in the vicinity of lakes (uvasaram) the foot-tracks,
which grow green grass (haria) with the trickle of drops of water
from the (bodies of) boars, have this grass bent under the heavy
load (gärava) of lumps of mud dropped (on the grass by the boars
shaking it off).
557. The lands, deeply splitting (cracking), have their
broken patches massed up and upheaving, with clumps of Musts
grass (growing on them), clustering, drying, elongated and thin.
558. Here the portion of the sky above, in this windless region
bordering on the forest, indicates (the fact of) a herd of elephants
(enjoying) their sleep, made brownish, as it (the sky) is, by the
ground-dust hurled (uggahia) (in the air) by the exhalations from
their trunks.
559. Here are these rat-infested tracts, become uneven
on account of their holes having been shattered (visatta), as the
loose (Jajjara) ground had its surface depressed under heavy
heaps of earth dug up (by them) and with a few barren
(ujjada) branches of sun-plants (akka) left over (on them).
560. The locations of trees here, although remaining (only)
as long columns of ashes (bhii), are to be ascertained by their
elongated condition (of shapes), the fire (of conflagration) having
sufficed for their prostration sideways (in the form of ashes).
561. The forest here attracts (attention) with its (pockets
of) vacant, levelled land (thalailla) in between, as the (old) trees
become sick (rugga) (dried up) in course of time, while the circling
groves of young trees formed (subsidiary, small) planted parks
(uvavaṇanta).
562. The mountainous, marshy forests here, cool with the
formation of shade on account of the thickness of creeper-canopies,
have grassy patches of turmeric (haliddi) with their healthy
(abundant) growth.
563. The bordering lands here look lovely with hard, black
stems of the foliage, (appearing) as if they (lands) have assi
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 360 =====
Scenes in Nature
milated (lit. drunk) the iron of ploughs (sirayasa) in their every
day friction (in the course of cultivation ).
564. The sun's reflection, fallen on golden rocks and deeply
tinged by the mass of rays (shooting up from them), looks reddish-
yellow like a ripened palm fruit (freshly) cut (sicchalliya).
565. The roads here with their (upper) surface of soft earth,
perforated (chiddiya) by the heavy particles of dust falling down
after having been tossed up (in the air) by (gusts of), winds
appear to be impressed with seals, as it were, by means of sparse
drops of water.
566. Here are these lands, loose like dry cowdung (karisa)
and bluish, brownish and rough, strewn, as they are, with faded
flowers, (dry) leaves and pieces of wood (lying scattered) under-
neath the trees.
567. Here are forest-regions, resounding with (notes of)
peacocks, having Kadamba trees in full blossom variegated with
old fruit and rendered cool with the fruit, buds (kosa) and doubled
(viuma) foliage of Palaia trees.
568. These trunks of trees smelling of ichor, (transferred to
them) by wild elephants in the act of rubbing their temples, have
their barks torn to shreds (daliya) with their claws by angry
lions, (rushing and) wrathfully raising themselves erect (against
them).
569. The summer nights look charming, the sky above being
screened off by a thick film of dust, the fog absent (anavasão)
during evening time, and the moon's pleasing orb (shining) in
the other half of the sky.
570. Here are these lakes where lotus-plants lie scattered
by the elephants plunging (in them, as a result of which) massive
columns of water are raised, the dry (varuña) lotuses floating
on the surface.
571. Here the sloping sites of lakes whose banks are brown
with bits of lotus-leaves collecting and clinging to the trees, the
spaces in between the split (phudia) leaves being (filled and)
soiled (avila) by (the cobwebs of) spiders (lä).
572. The forests here, being enveloped by the rising tops of
(shooting) fire-flames slanted (tamsikaa) by the (gusts of) winds,
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 361 =====
64
Gaüdavaho
blaze up (dippanti) first at the top and afterwards (faamu) at
the bottom.
573. The lands here, giving out the odour of (recent burning
by) wild fire, look nice (agghanti) with their ant-hills tawny-coloured
as a result of having been recently (baked) dry (via) in the
(furnace of the) fire, while the trees wither at the bottom (heltha).
574. The breezes here can set in motion the leafy creepers
more quickly (and easily), as they are now lighter (and) have.
developed empty spaces (sumnabhäva) in between the leaves, freed
from dust as a result of the (washing) onset of water (shower).
575. Here are forest-lands with interposed, yellowish patches
of lawns remaining intact, as before (tahapariṭṭhia), (having
escaped burning), (thus indicating the fact of) forest-fires stopping
to rest at will (wherever they liked in their acts of damage and
destruction).
576. Here comes out (gif) (of the pond) a herd of boars,
with bodies made more formidable (vialaara), as it were, and
with lazy, half-opened (blinking) eyes, as their eye-lids (puda)
are soiled in the act of wallowing (lolama) in mud.
577. Here in the habitations of cowherds, even warm water
is drunk by travellers, although it looks whitish when placed in
(poured) in vessels (päri) in which usually cows are milked.
578. The wind here flutters the lotus-plants, the leaves of
which are pulled out from the roots to which they (leaves) are
attached, (producing) a hissing sound (sakkari) as it moves,
, over water and Kaša grass, the cranes nearby feeling harrassed
(aysia) thereby.
579. Strolls (parisakkia) over sandy mounds here during
evenings give peculiar pleasure, an additional delightful feature
(sarasa) in them being the sight of birds (in the vicinity) casting
(furtive) glances as they recede with slanted necks.
580. Here spreads the perfume, thick and cool, as it filtrates
(samgalana) through the blossoms of various creepers, possessed
of extremely fine and deep fragrance.
581. The leaves of Maludhani creepers, (shaped) uneven
like the soles (paoara) of a camel, upturned and greyish with
pinkish edges, (go on) reeling and rolling about (paholamti) here.
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 362 =====
Scenes in Nature
65
582. The forest-lands here, the foremost parts of which are
(keenly) observed by travellers sitting under the shade (of trees),
look charming, thickly crowded, as they are, with Kamkola trees,
(crops of) pulses and herds of monkeys.
583. The perfume of Karahata flowers, the back surfaces
(vallho) of which are greyish-pink like the broad cheeks
(gamdavisa) of a fair lady in separation, spreads about here,
(specially) sweet, as it is, in the afternoon.
584. The slightly cool (darasiala) perfume of Kadamba
flowers, deep (jaradha) and pungent, as the roots are soaked
in wines (offered in fulfilment of their cravings), rolls about
here, its pink filaments having faded out.
585. The fragrance of Priyamgu creepers that are reddish
like blossoms of date-palms, spreads about here, having mixed
with the honey-particles of full-grown lotuses.
586. The glory of winter finds its life-breath (asasol) in the
Marubaka creepers here, thickly (covered) with buds and having
a pink, facial (external) appearance, as also in the bright (tara)
white Kunda flowers.
587. The wind here flutters the bordering fields of barley,
(raising) waves among (barley) blossoms which change their
colour every moment, trampled upon, as they often are, by
the herds of deer, becoming confused (about the direction) of
their movement.
588. The foremost bordering regions of barley fields look
lovely, as the husk (s) of their blossoms becomes scarce
(paviralanta) owing to the heaving (säsa) (swelling) of ripen-
ing grains (phala).
589. (Water from) forest-wells, which look bright and
gorgeous with rows (pali) of Karavira flowers, is drunk (by
people) with their mouths made sour (after chewing) the fried
(pulosa) fragrant barley grains.
590. The landscapes in different directions even during day-
time look dusky like night-fall, (groves of) mango trees being
enveloped in the ground-dust (mahiraa) which is coated (ahioa)
with smoke from the forest-fires.
G. 5
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only.
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 363 =====
66
Gaüdavaho
591. A traveller sucks an inner piece (gabbhasaala) of an
orange, (thinking) as if it is his beloved's lower lip, downy
(pamhala) and reddish-grey, as it looks, with a skin (cuduppa')
from which the threads are loosened.
592. Here during winter when flowers become scarce, the
God of Love, who (generally) downtools (lit. keeps aside his
flowery arrows), engages the couples in a hand-to-hand tussle
under the pretext of a tight embrace.
593. Here is quite a peculiar charm of breezes, invested with
the sweet perfume of Kancanära filaments set in motion (by them),
which makes the forests riotous (ucchamkhalia).
594. Blooms here a bud of Madhavi creepers adorned with
pinkish stems (bandhana) and tender leaves, looking dull-red
(mailārama) like the throat of a full-grown pigeon.
595. Bright and beautiful are (ahirdamti) the forests here
in (their multi-coloured aspect of) green, pink, white, grey and
mixed shades, with a thick network of branches growing out of
season (lit. setting aside the seasonal sequence) (kamāvamukka).
596. Nice (and happy is the advent of) days of spring, when
with the formation of fruit, the greenish (hariaamano) tips of
mango-blossoms become scarce and the throats of the sweet-
warbling female cuckoos (enjoy) a free play (akumtha).
597. Indeed, out of curiority (to try) new arrows, Cupid
must be indiscriminately discharging mango (blossom) shafts;
since even those, not in separation (from their beloveds) are
(found to be) uneasy (sua) and restless.
598. Blessed (and happy) are the days of village festivals
when children are adorned (fividikkia), women feel the pride of
(wearing) pink-coloured (navaramgaa) sarees, while the (poor)
farmers (look on disinterested) without a tremor (of excitement).
599. Here on the branches of mango trees are to be seen
blossoms spotted (kabbura) (black) with a very few bees perched
(on them), appearing as if (they are) the slightly-burnt shafts
of Cupid.
600. The forests here, slumbering in winter, look charming
with their slightly-opened reddish eyes in the form of the tender,
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 364 =====
Scenes in Nature
67
pinkish sprouts, looking as if they have been (stirred) to a
state of awakening (by the spring).
601. The fruit of mango trees here, still lingering (at the
stage of) incomplete (asaala) ripening, attracts (the eye, looking)
bluish like rounded cheeks of a dark Dravidian damsel, rubbed
with turmeric (pigment).
602. The yellowish, powdered stuff gets squeezed out from
the finest (jacca) (variety of) Karcüra plants, when trampled upon
by the deer (epa) under their hooves, looking like the yellow,
Rocană dust obtained from the split bamboos.
603. May not Cupid here, who had created constant occupa-
tion (employment) for his bow during all these long Hemanta
(winter) nights, (again choose) the (same) targets in the
persons (already) vanquished (by him; but he should make fresh
conquests).
604. The tips of the sprouts of trees here, at the beginning
(muha) of spring, emerge pink up to their farthest extremities,
perhaps because of the fact that the crimson colour (blood) of
their own sap has been carried (to their extreme ends from the
point where) their twigs were cut open (for the sprouts to shoot
through).
605. The bees here, besmeared with drops (vidula) of
honey from fresh mango (blossoms) which they could somehow
collect, are themselves being licked (piljanti), as they hover
(rumtamta), by the other rows of bees (who cannot get a chance
to go close to the blossoms).
606. The fruit of the mango trees turns gradually upside-
down (ohura) by the weight (garava) of its juice, its outstretched
stem, pulled out from its stalk, becoming loose and swollen
(usasia) at the time of its ripening (poriyama).
607. The forest villages here, where children are delighted
to obtain fruit (gifts) and which look beautiful with well-planned
timber houses, attract the heart (by the fact that) they are not
thickly populated with people (a-janainna).
608. The heart, for some peculiar reason (kimpi), clings to
(lingers in the deserted (uvvattha) villages, shattered by (an
excessive growth of) trees (over dilapidated houses), while
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 365 =====
68
Gaüdavaho
columns of smoke are now confined (only) to the habitations of
cowherds and a few crows are (seen) loitering in between.
609. Here is a grove (samda) of big trees, nestling by a
hillside, where in a vacant (solitary temple) Siva's Limga is bathed
by a religious man (dhommia), coming (by chance) to the
village and which, smelling of leaves (dry and rotten) has a pool
of water (kumda) deep and bluish.
610. The trees here on the premises, shrivelling still
(aumiino) with their foliage folding up at the roots by the down-
ward (current of) winds, produce low murmuring sounds
(jhamkarino) over the (aerial) path (in line with) their tops.
611. The trunks of ageing trees here, reverberating with the
(chattering of) much-roving monkeys (sāhāsāranga) and having
big and round honey-suckles formed (on them by the bees), look
charming.
612. The branches of Malūra (Bilva) trees here, at first
weighed (bent) down, have regained a slight heaving up, as their
fruit becomes lighter on account of dehydration during (the
period of) ripening.
613. Central portions of grassy tracts in the forest-lands
look charming, as some patches in between regain their green
shade with the brushing off (bhinna) of the (overlaid) dew (ava-
saya) by the tread of wild beasts, looking moist and fresh in the
early morning.
614. This water here, reddish-brown in colour (for having
mixed) with rotten (parisaliya) bamboo leaves, flows through
the mountain-valleys, stumbling over age-old pebbles (uvala)
turned greenish (hariäamāya) with (encrusted) dirt.
615. The sages here dwell in caves, the boulders of which are
dislodged by (the force of) falling (rushing) streams, wearing.
as they do, garments dyed red (käsiya), having the shade of old
jujube fruit-stone.
616. Here over the lines of mountain-slopes (piambamālāsu),
the caves of which are accepted as residences by the Siddhas
(perfected sages) and which are (thickly covered) with trees,
(dumavaisu), the bees obtain fulfilment of their desire (panao),
as they can drink (the honey) of flowers (in all seasons).
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 366 =====
Scenes in Nature
617. Here are mountains, overlaid (at the feet) with heaps
of powdered (stones), to which condition huge boulders, dislodged
(from mountain-sides), were reduced when fallen down and which
have embankments uneven, glistening and noisy and (which
supply) pieces of stones that are fit for (masonry) construction.
618. Here move, with a slow tread, lions inside the cave-
temples formed out of Kuruvinda (ruby) stones, the edges (hira)
of their claws sharpened upon piles of broken (pointed) stones
(kakkara) (over which they pass).
619. The rivers here, with their embankments, the stones
of which are a bit worn out (khallaia) (and polished), with a
few small fish (swimming) and with their under-current looking
variegated by the shadow of foam-crust.
620. The villages on mountain-ridges (surrounded by)
wavy (bandhuräamta) thickets of Dhava trees, (standing) on
feeble (pisaha) roots with their barks peeled off (avavakkala),
abound in (the supply of) thick, sour rum (sihu) distilled from
molasses (as a part of cottage industry?).
621. Even during the day here, the outskirts of mountain-
forests, shining (ummilla) with the sun's rays deviated (pariatta)
(towards them) after obstruction by the tops (of mountains),
apppear to be enveloped in smoke, as they are not clear (maila)
for observation from a distance.
622. Squatting on their feet, chin (cibuaala) uplifted and
the thin mouth-line extended, such a slumbering pose of lions here
looks charming. (especially) as the sharp tips of their claws pro-
trude under the pressure (on paws).
623. The wide, reverberating echo of the loud tinkling sounds
(jhamjhana) of cymbals beaten, takes a long time to quieten, being
halted and sent back through a series of (surrounding) caves
(kopphāda).
624. The sky here, (lit up) by the brilliance (shooting up)
from the joints (samdhi) of bright, jewelled slabs piled up in heaps
(samda), looks reddish (yambira) like the petal of a pomegranate
flower fully expanded (paridalia).
625. The mountains here, with their peaks flung far above
and their slopes (niyamba) standing out prominent to their full
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 367 =====
70
Gaüdavaho
extent, appear clouded (maila) at the top, while gradually
brightening up at the feet.
626. Here are these lands, clustered (kalila) with creepers
coiling round the trees which, when cut, have dried up (uva),
(the surface of these lands) made uneven by the holes (left in the
ground), as the bulbous roots have been dug out by the Sabaras.
627. The tracks of boars shot by arrows are here pursued
by the hunters (väha), marked as they are, with seal-like drops of
blood looking brighter further and further.
628. And then the clear, bright sea comes to be noticed, its
coastal line (peranta) coming into full prominent view by the
land lying about in its full extent of jewels, like the fully stretched
circle (phanada) of Sesa's hoods.
629. Here are rows of coastal forests of the sea, (studded)
with clumps of date-palms, matted (parijadila) (and clustered at
the tops) with leaves and stalks, rising tall (from the ground
like) high columns (diharuddanda).
630. Here on ponds, very early in the morning, bloom lotus-
plants kissed by swans (marüla) with their beaks, veritable hide-
out habitations (palli) of the barbarous (pulinda) bees residing.
631. Here comes from forest-creepers on the Northern
Mountain (uamahihara), situated to the north of this sea,
fragrant perfume, spreading in the sky and following the speedy
course (raya) of the wind (sämira).
632. The falling mass of pollen (raoha) from the betel trees
here, giving reddish colour (pädalia) to the dust on the earth,
scented with perfume (obtained) by (mutual) friction and making
the wearing apparel (siamsana) (of the people) brown-coloured
(kavilina), presents an appearance of the twilight glow.
633. Here on the mountain-ridges, monkeys go on licking
their own sweet-smelling hands, thickly smeared (picchila) with
the juice (toddy) of the mountain-palms cracked by (the force
of) winds.
634. The breeze here sets the forest-groves of cocoa-nut
trees dancing, their fruit-shells (phalokosa) making a loud noise
as they swing and clash (ramkholira) (against one another) in
their ripened condition of the kernel in the interior (gabbhasara).
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 368 =====
Scenes in Nature
71
635. The breezes here, stirred (samvelliä) by the leaves of
dalm-trees, rustling and swinging, move on producing crackling
sounds (cajakkarino), as the fruits of the best variety of grass
(tanaria) burst at their stems (by the wind's action).
636. And now the mountain Kailasa passes by - (Kailasa)
where the orb of the moon, on account of the snowy frost, fades
away, feeling distressed (vihura) as it were, by the grief at having
remembered (his friend) Cupid's downfall (destruction).
637. Here are exhaled by Väsuki breeze-like breaths held
(pent up) in his fully expanded (upphulla) hoods, through his
throat suffocated (ibidia) by the knot (in which his body is
tied up) to bind (hold together) His (Siva's) matted hair.
638. Here on its ridges, even during nights, the (blazing)
twigs of highly (potent) medicinal herbs, enveloped in their own
(innate) jewel-like lustre, do not come to be clearly distinguished
(nivvadamti), although the cobras (nearabout) have been repelled
by their (anti-venom) smell.
639. The mass of rays here, (shooting from) the jewelled
embankments, appears paled in lustre (vicchia) like the upturned
plumage of a peacock, its full refulgence being haltingly relayed
(parikkhalia) through the layers of mist (nihāra) (overhanging).
640. Pallor flashes white over the clouds that have (now)
occupied the (mountain) peaks at the break (of the rainy season),
having, as it were, discharged streams (streaks) of lightning-blood.
641. The fresh nail-marks (nahavaa) over the breasts of
the beauties of the Siddhas here develop the charm of picturesque
birch-leaf paintings marked by reddish border-lines.
642. The mountain-caves here, (illumined) by the light
radiating (samdhia) from the sages in still meditation and (con-
sequent) concentration (of the mind), become dark, as soon as
their meditation ceases.
643. The decline (parinäma) of days (evenings) are
(ruefully) watched with upraised mouths by buffaloes mightily
pleased while leaving the ponds, the sun's rays being screened by
the mountain-peaks.
だい
644. Happy (are) the evenings when grassy regions are
cooled by (falling) shadows and paths on the forest-outskirts
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 369 =====
72
Gaidavaho
(echo) the songs of cow-herdesses (gopis) returning from the
cities.
645. The high columns of mountain-ridges here, lovely with
their bowers turned greyish by the smoke rising from hamlets
(palli) (down below), appear grave (and solemn ), as at the
advent of the night (ņisägama).
646. The moon, shedding off the rising glow (uayachavi),
his rays (now) yellowish like an old piece of ivory, looks beautiful,
as his orb rests on the mountain-peak.
647. Here move on rows of clouds sprinkling shower over
fresh shoots (kamdala) of trees, and appearing deep-blue
(ahinila) like the ring round the throats of old sparrows (kala-
vimka).
648. The perfume of Bakula flowers here, (fallen down)
and gone dry (vasuda) at the bottom of the trees, but bursting
open with (a shower of) water, goes out (visimmahai), (smelling)
sweet like old wine prepared from Kinva seeds.
649. At the time of the first rain-shower, waters (in different
pools), which remain cool at the top surface but (hot down be-
low), because of its retention (sivesa) over heated ground, are
drunk by the forest deer, joining (ghadia) their mouths just a
bit (hesitatingly to the surface of the water).
650. The breezes blow, spraying about the yolk (kalala) of
birds' eggs bursting (on the ground) when discarded by shaking
trees, tossing up (utthamghino) dust-particles cooled by clouds.
651. Here flow these wide-sweeping floods, (raising)
bubbles (bubbua) greenish inside with the cowdung absorbed
(viräa) (in them) and looking picturesque with (flocks of) fish
netted (samdania) (trapped in) by marshy patches.
652. Here reels (and lingers) the beauty of grounds under-
neath (a grove of) the Jamba trees, giving out a strong smell of
their fruit-stones (phalatthi) washed (1
(viccholia) by shower-
streams, very few bees being (left over now).
653. Here comes rolling the cool fragrance of blossoming
(ubbuddha) Kadamba trees from the mountain-ridges, over which
plantain trees have shot up and the Kesara (Bakula) groves are
smashed by buffaloes (seriha).
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 370 =====
Desolate Condition of Cities and Territories
73
654. Here in the rainy season emerges the charm of forest-
breezes (carrying) the smell of the pulp (silra) of Bilva (fruit),
moistened with water, reddish and insipid.
655. The paths on lands, darkened by the dust held fast
(padibajjhanta) by fresh (shower) streams, look lovely, spotted
(kabbura) as they are, with the greyish imprints of the hooves
of the deer.
656. The nights here, although bereft of clouds (avamehão),
have blurred moonlight and gentle breezes, the stars very slightly
coming into view in the sky, blinded (with the darkness of the
sheets of) water (over the earth).
657. (And now) here spreads the beauty of the days in
autumn, pleasant with the fragrance of honey formed inside the
blossoming (ummuddia) Sinduvära flowers and with lotuses
pouring out their perfume.
658. In this way, various forest regions with their (chara-
cteristic) lovely aspects were observed (saccavia) by his army-
men, who met in victory different countries on the earth in all
directions.
The desolate condition of the territories and cities of enemy-
kings
659. The jewelled embankments here (in the enemies'
territories), the lustre of which is faintly (virala) observed at the
loss of their fresh (polished) brightness (virasa) like the faded
(viratta) (discoloured) rainbow, their (former) brilliance now
to be imagined from those parts cut open by buffaloes with
their hooves.
660. The lovely appearance of parks is quite different now,
(wild and) rough like forests, their trees being smothered with
oppressive congestion (pidia) in various parts by canopied over-
growth of creepers, turning and twisting (parlatta) at their sweet
will (without the gardeners' direction).
661. The flower of those very creepers which (worn as a
decoration when only a bud) started blooming (bhijjamtam),
(and when faded) left its filaments completely hidden in the hair
(alea) of graceful ladies, now drops down (from its stem) being
pushed out (pellia) by the (developing) fruit.
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only"
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 371 =====
74
Gaüdavaho
662. The same interior (halls) of houses (bhavanocchamga)
with their top (roof) structures gone away (demolished) and
the foreparts (pabbhāra) of the walls standing, as they were,
inclined outwards (ovatta), now look like waterless (dry) big wells.
663. The same market-places (or picture-galleries), which
(rested) on pillars studded with such precious piles of gems, now
(boast) of the glory (vihava) of only the hood-jewels of cobras
freely moving about.
664. Here, indeed, at the time in the rains is that city with
a ring of huge heaps of loose earth at the place of the city's loca-
tion, with pieces of gems and corals shining in different parts where
they happen to be embedded.
665. Those places, where the cities were founded (vivesa)
(and established), although (situated) far off, appear to be near
enough, with the cupolas (domes-vidamka) and arches of temples
and ramparts (sala) emerging in full (and clear) view on account
of their dustless condition.
666. The empty spaces (oväsa) inside the houses, with ups
and downs (thaidia) in places of the lost granaries, caused by
coarse husk and dust, show up deep and hollow holes (for one
who) would search for underground wealth.
667. The fields here with furrows of ploughs (siragama),
(levelled up) with an overgrowth of vegetation in time and now
looking deep green, (are covered) with thickets of thriving sun-
plants (mandara) due to the richness of the soil.
668. Looking up on raised toes (umpanti) as it were, to the
rise of dawn (kallam) in these low-lying (sunken) (sävasāda)
tracts full of Karabha plants, the directions stop here, as it were,
giving out the fragrance of lotuses.
669. Here in the parks (uvaniggama) are these swing-courts
underneath the trees, the (swing) ropes having snapped (vocchea),
the knot left over (tied) on the boughs where grass has grown
thin and old.
670. Here are outlying lands on (city) borders where (stru-
ctural) monuments commemorating (the glory of) of past kings,
collapsing, are reduced to fine reddish (brick) powder, (their
existence) now to be inferred from old reptiles (crawling about).
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 372 =====
Desolate Condition of Cities and Territories
75
671. Here in the wells full of lotuses and Karavira flowers are
waters lovely (even) in summer, that excel (in quality) the essence
of Kunda (flowers) and Uštra plants or the pink mango juice.
672. Here on the precincts are some building projects comm-
enced by good men, with their built-up solid foundations, with
piles of stones cemented, but later abandoned in (a state of)
incomplete construction, now gone old (and dilapidated).
673. Here are parts (of cities) with arch-tops, to which are
fastened big bells with straps (näli), remaining in tact (fhia)
because of their inaccessibility, (thus) indicating (sambhavia)
their great prosperity (in the past).
674. Here are these residential extensions now, with (only)
the piled-up walls standing up-to their tops, the wooden supports
having fallen down; (they) as it were, torment (their heart with
the heat of) the bright light of the sun scorching their inside.
675. Here are dwellings where the threshold construction
in stones is (covered) by thin iron bars that are still without rust,
being (constantly) rubbed (and polished) by people, while, of
the light doors made out of Agaru pieces, only a few chips of wood
are left over.
676. Here are extensions of raised grounds (thala), with
sloughs of snakes hanging over joints of the dislocated wooden
beams (pindi) and with distinct signs (lima) of mud-layers
stretching all along their length.
677. Plucking the flowers of tamarind trees (cinci) greyish
like the wings of an old sparrow and crushing (olumpa) it into
a lump on his palms, the traveller makes a morsel of it (eats).
678. Here are to be seen decayed bricks, with thick layers of
reddish clay sticking (to them) and coming out through the cracks
in the walls falling apart from their first (lower) foundation.
679. On account of the fact that the ring of the encircling
wall is corroded (parihina) by a coating of salty layers, the tubular
wells appear more awesome and upraised, being fully filled (with
water).
680. The streets, grave and solemn, with their solid thickness
(pisattama), with their conditions of slight wear, tear and friction
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 373 =====
76
Galidavaho
(parikasana) and (strewn) with broken chips of precious stones,
even now speak of their expansive width (ahoa).
681. Both the ponds and temples (being buried underground
and levelled up (samikaa) in course of time, the lands here look
uneven (visama) only with slight elevations (umaa) and depres-
sions (i).
682. Here are these old (decayed) walls, with lines of point-
ng in chunam (curareha) still held fast at the base (foundation).
deviating (moving away) from the doors of a round-shaped (golas)
house and with reddish-yellow decaying plasters (of bricks).
683. The houses here look, as it were, solemn and awe-
inspiring, admitting more light inside because of broken patches
in lattice-windows and (mixing) in their own shadows the faint
shadows of their pillars.
684. The terraces here even during day-time are hair-raising
(ukkamtaamti) because of an imaginary (fear) of ghosts, raising
sudden sounds where there are no sounds.
685. The premises of houses here cause distress (in the heart
to see) their palms and date-trees (despoiled and) left bare (by
people) out of their greed for fruits and foliage (and to see) the
old water-drawing wheels (on their wells) deprived of their iron
bars, their (wooden) spokes lying (broken and) scattered about.
686. Here on the outskirts are even to-day the paths leading
to the precious hoards of wealth, as indicated by symbolic signs,
being watched by kings with down-cast (ohura) heads, (feeling
ashamed at the thought of) having been frustrated in their efforts
(plans) (vihulrambha).
687. The streets here at nights are, for a long time, enveloped
in pitchy darkness, with no outlet of smoke and dust any more
and greatly reduced (in width) (viralão) by the houses falling
on them.
688. Such were the conditions (samsivesa) of (their own)
cities witnessed by the hostile kings, who (left a long time back)
to join (our King) in his service, greatly disturbing (and destroying)
the prosperity (of their own cities).
689. "Look at the face of this woman which has regained
its brightness and has again taken to the mirror. It beams like
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 374 =====
Love - Sports
77
the lotus of a lotus-plant kissed by the Sun's orb standing face to
face."
690. "This (ima) (woman) has a face from which the
hostile flush of anger wears away, as her lover seizes her lower lip
(between his own) like a crystal cup, the wine in which goes on
subsiding at every sip."
691. "How charming is this woman who mixes and moves
her fingers in the hand of her lover, which, slipping down from
her neck, has cupped one of her breasts, looking as if she has
started the diversion of (playing on) a lute with a gourd (on its
handle)!"
692. "This woman has a face with the forehead overshadowed
by her locks of hair seized by her lover, thus looking like the night
of the dark fortnight with the moon's orb in its slightly reduced
first digit."
693. "The union of the moon and the deer (as seen in the
spot) who have been vanquished by the lustre of her face and her
eyes, has taken place because of the fact, perhaps, that both of
them (the moon and the deer) share the common grief (of defeat)."
694. This was how servants described the love-sports of the
wives of the army (men), among the multifarious pleasures,
worth enjoying in the rainy season, after the bow was brought
down (from the shoulder to rest) by him (our King).
The King's Glorification by Bards
695. "At whose blows, love (desire) for flowers, showered
by gods, develops in (the heart of) of bees flying up from the broad
temples of enemies' elephants shaking their heads (at these blows),"
696. "The lustrous flashes of smiles of these ladies (here,
formerly) belonging to that Magadha monarch, O King, are
not noticed, being repelled (pellia), as it were, by the brilliance
of your own great glory."
697. "The streams of tears (flowing down) on the cheeks
of these ladies, which bear reflections of the hairy strings of cho-
wries (wielded and) waved by them in your service, are (also) not
observed, having been already sucked (absorbed) inside (the
cheeks) through fear."
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 375 =====
78
Gaidavaho
698. "From whose (elephants') cavity in the temples, dark-
ness exits (nil) as it were, under the guise of a massive quantity
(ukkara) of the drops of muddy ichor thrown out, (the darkness)
being driven out, as it were, by the rays of pearls stored up inside
their temples,"
699. "Such mighty, victorious elephants belonging to you,
O King, who routed a host of enemies, have to find diversional
(outlet) for their spirited vigour (team) only in (the pastime
of) dashing against (padipellana) mountain-embankments."
The sun trimming himself to make his lustre bearable for his
wife Avarca
700. "(The sun whose) mass of rays, under the disguise of
smoke released from his hard bones struck by the (sharp) point
of (Tvastr's) chisel, emits, as it were, a thick layer of darkness
swallowed by his lustre every day."
701. "Multitudes of chunks from his body, flying off
(ucchalia) at every chopping stroke of the chisel, go away (fall
off), curtailing (brightness) of the parts (periods) of days in
proportion to the sizes (of their bulk separated from the body of
the Sun)."
702. "His facial orb, enveloped in the lustre of his white
teeth radiating at the time of chiselling (ghadana), looks as if it
is the light of the Moon illuminating (the face) while entering
(the Sun's mouth) every day."
703. "Parts of weapons, produced from his body cut with
chisel and making a clanking sound (ranakkāra), fall off, giving
him happiness (at the thought) that they would stay (with gods)
for their fight with the demons."
704. "Thus even that lord of the day (Sun) blazing.
with his orb doubly lustrous because of his being chiselled by Tvastr
(tatthi) (Gods' sculptor), does not fully come up (purei) (for
comparison with) the brilliance of your prowess."
705. "Homage (lit. salutation at the feet) is given to you
by your (erstwhile) enemies, who keep far away the (clinging)
rows of bees over their crest-chaplets, appearing as if (the eyebrows
in) their frowns have dropped down from their down-cast (ohura)
foreheads."
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 376 =====
Glorification by Bards
79
706. "It is true that when you are seen, it appears (to us)
that there is none like you. Your sight alone establishes the great-
ness of your time (era)."
707. "When you are remembered, O Lord, even the adverse
disposition of fate does no harm (torment); summer, with the
rainy season near at hand, invests the forest-grove with foliage."
708. "What should be said of those who have (in them)
merits of their own? (they rejoice to find similar traits in you);
but even those, lacking in merits, delight, like the meritorious ones,
by cultivating (avalambino) (in themselves) your merits.
709. "It is as if by the close association (samjhena) of
Laksml with you, resting on your right arm, that your (right) hand
rains a shower of gold, never ceasing, never ending (anitṭhiam)."
710. "If Vasuki has a thousand mouths (tongues) at his
command, then why does he not praise you (fully) ? (That were
possible, however,) if he were competent enough to think of all
your merits in his one single heart (mind)!"
711. "Even those people, O King, on whose foreheads Fate
has inscribed something of untoward (visama) consequences, get
it wiped out (on your feet) under the pretext of falling on them."
712. "In your gallant endeavour to approach (in love)
(ahisarana) the enemies' Goddess of Wealth on the midnight in
the form of a sudden battle, you look charming with your reflection
on your sword-blade, appearing as if you are cloaked in blue."
713. "The letters of your name, though quite ordinary, have
been aptly given to you (while being named by your parents)
with great thought; since even by a mere mention of your name
alone, you flash in their hearts (to give relief and security)."
714. "With (clusters of) pearls, clinging to the sword-
blade, being drawn out from the temples (of elephants), your
sword imitates the graceful activity of the cloud that has commenced
(adhatto) a shower of hail stones (uvala-varisa).
715. "The (bright-red) vermilion (used) for seals on your
commandments, the servants receive (welcome) as (a symbol
of) your affection, while your adversaries find it as a glow of the
fire of your wrath."
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 377 =====
80
Gaüdavaho
716. "Leaving her (favourite) abode on your right arm,
how (possibly) will Lakemi dwell on your sword?-Ah! we
know; what is seen is just her reflection in it (sword), stationed,
as She is, here (on your right arm)."
717. "The merits of the people, O Master, do not become
so manifest (known) merely by their own eminence, as when they
get famous after having been decorated with honours by you!"
718. "It is not, indeed, for the first time that you have been
put to the trouble of knitting your eye-brows (in frowns) by your
enemies, joining their heads to your footstool, in fear, as it were,
of their offence."
719. "By the uninterrupted streams of tears of the wives of
your enemies, O Master, the long creepers of their trembling tresses
of hair appear to have been rooted (underground) as it were."
720. "How can Laksmi, like a young girl, derive pleasure
(in staying) with those who have no manliness (in them)? All
women, however, with great difficulty, come to like such a condi-
tion of having to stay (with the unmanly)."
721. "Some (of your enemies) exhausted (jhina) them-
selves (to death) on your sword; others came to you (to surrender
and) seek refuge with you. The remaining enemies also escaped
to the sea, while some of them found shelter (somehow) some-
where (God knows where)!"
722. "Men born in one (and the same) family either go
down (in disgrace) or rise high up (in glory), like roots and
sprouts (emanating) from one common seed (-roots going
down under and sprouts growing tall) over the earth."
723. "The censure of fickleness (attaching) to Lakem! has
been completely wiped out only (savara) by you. She, too, gave
you overlordship without, however, the evil traits (and tenden-
cies) of a supreme master (dictator)."
724. "This, O King, looks somewhat contrary in you, who
are (fortified by) the strength of (thought and) discretion: you
are afraid of faults; but the faults have made themselves scarce in
you!"
725. "On the horizons of all directions, O King, your
merits are seen to be overhanging, brightened as they are, having
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 378 =====
Glorification by Bards
81
been washed clean, as it were, by the spray showered by
quarter-elephants."
726. "Those good men are attracted towards you by your
merits, great (and outstanding) in this world. You, however,
are drawn towards them even by a fraction of a merit in them.
You are, thus, among the good men, a greater and a better man."
727. "The seeds of glory, which were sown and wetted with
water (poured) over gifts at the proper time in the fields viz.
worthy Brahmins, have now grown (to yield you), O Lord, ( a
rich harvest of affluence)".
728. "Vanity was passed on by you to your supplicants who
(strut about) stiff and erect (samurtuna) with the fulfilment of
their great desires; hence, I think, no such trait (of vanity) pulsates
in you, even in your position of supreme authority. "
729. "The mighty tree of munificence, O King, has been
aided in its overgrowth, as by branches, far and wide, by those
very kings, who, receiving from you, gave away (in gifts) here and
there."
730. "With the pearls (obtained) from holes bored by your
sharp lance (tomara) dug deep in the temples of elephants, your
beloved ladies weave creeper-like necklaces."
Removal of Bodice
731. Kept over the whole length of the loosened string passed
through eyelet-holes (jäla) (attached to the bodice), the hand
rolls down to the place of its knot (vidaatthana), which
becomes tough and hard, (kakkhada), by the upward pull exerted
by plump (pedhāla) breasts.
732. (Glimpses of) parts of the belly, over which the encir-
cling strap with eye-holes joined to the bodice (jäliä) is being
untied with the delicate ( vellahala) fingers of lotus-like hands, look
beautiful, the relaxed (triple) folds being (bhamgamga) being
slightly visible.
733. The full rounded expanse of the breasts, characterised
by rows of curved nail-marks, (their scabs) being painfully peelep
off (ucculanta) by the tight flaps (kavadaa) (of the bodice),
acquires the charm of the full moon's orb left off a little by a cloud..
G. 6
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 379 =====
82
Gaidavaho
734. The mass of creeper-like (curly) locks of hair, tossed
up and dishevelled (visamthula), looks lovely, the nostrils heaving
up (tulia) with forceful (uvvana), extended breaths (vittharamta)
by the oppression of the throat (caused by the bodice being re-
moved over the neck).
735. The pair of (delicate) creeper-like arms, with their wrists
strenuously exerting to remove, painfully, over the foremost parts
of the hands, jewelled bracelets, looks picturesque, as it presses
against, (to cover up) through shyness, the heavy (exposed) breasts.
736. "The bodice being thus taken off (uttaria) with very
interesting incidents (valara) (in the act of its removal), the
bevy of your beloveds gets on to your bed, dressed in thin, flimsy
(ladaha) apparel."
737. With his victory thus hailed with joy by the bards and
his army-arrays (senävinäsa) having marched over Gadhipura
(Kanya-kubja), the King halted all other activities (to concen-
trate) only on the delicate (ladaha) pleasures of love's dalliance.
Cupid, the Love-God, being burnt by Siva
738. (God Siva)-His face, just when closed (absorbed)
in meditation, begins (to change over to) a reddish (flushed)
glow because of indignation, when He discerned the cause of His
mental affectation, the lower lip throbbing at this time.
739. The eyes open their corners (avanga), becoming
dreadfully red through anger little by little, and their lustre deeply
intensified by the jewels of the Lord of cobras (Väsuki), coiled
up over His brawny (fleshy) ears.
740. The broad expanse (parisäha) of the chest darkens,
its bright loveliness (caused) by ashes fading, when assailed.
(ahlutta) by particles of perspiration, the portion round the throat,
lustrous (blue), being thereby indiscernible.
741. The eye on the forehead, with the greatest of difficulty,
opens out, the eye-lids being pushed out by the mass of (inner)
fire-flames, although it (eye) was being pressed down by the knitting
action of thick eye-brows (frowns).
742. (These women) on whom rests (lit. sits) the flower-
bowed God (Cupid) even to-day for his victory, with his arrows
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 380 =====
The Graceful dalliance of Ladies
83
unblunted (amtha), although deprived, as he is, of his own body
(burnt) by the fire of wrath of the Three-eyed (God),
743. (These women) whose (features, namely) a saunter
(bhamiam) with the hair-braid tossed about, the bright, white
pair of (delicate) creeper-like arms, the (lovely) costume and
faces with eyes (mischievously) tremulous in dalliance, (are so
captivating),
744. The gallant king, with his broad neck caressingly pressed
(ämattha) by the tender lotus-fibres in the form of the encircling
(naa) arms of such beloved women, puts on the assortment
(vicchitti) of the summer dress.
745. By him, a full-blown (ataruna) blossom of young
Kadamba trees with its slight-fragrant filaments and coupled with
bits of tender sprouts, was turned into a crest-gem (cāmani)
(decoration) of these ladies.
746. The breezes blowing at the beginning (muha) of the
night, agreeable (comforting) till the time of clouds (rainy season),
filled with the fragrance of Ketaka flowers blooming in gardens
and carrying (thin) spray of water, attract the heart.
747. The nights are very much liked (agghamti) by him,
sweet, as they are, by the awakening (blooming) of white lilies,
with the moon partitioned (khamdia) by clouds occasionally
(virala) coming over (the orb), while the downpour of rain
continues without end (asamatta).
748. The sighs, perfumed, burst out from (the hearts of)
ladies even at a moment's separation from him, (carrying) as
it were, a spot of honey from the flowery arrow imbedded in the
captivated heart.
749. He is looked for by the ladies with (eager, longing)
eyes, which rush up (for him) in both directions with streaming
tears of joy, (the eyes) extending their delicate arms, as it were,
to hold (him) in an embrace.
Moreover,
750. (The ladies) who, with their hair-lines (on the stomach),
suddenly broken in waves of triple folds, appear charming
(sahamti), showing, as it were, the curling tresses at the end of the
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 381 =====
84
Gaidavaho
braid of their hair on the back, (reflected from behind) on the
crystal-clear (transparent) surface of the belly,
751. Who, with a smile blended (ayaviddha) with the rosy
lustre of their lower lip, exhibit (a picture of) the (pinkish) moon,
newly risen, with a black spot in the form of a cluster of bees,
(gathered over the lips, attracted) by the deep fragrance of their
breaths,
752. Who, with their eyes, the tremulous pupils of which
meet the palms of hands in the form of their sprout-like ear-decora-
tion, display a ball game, as it were, in their (enthusiasm of) child-
hood still lingering in them,
753. Who, covered with a veil of blue silk, looking like a
thick (hovering) cluster of bees, imitate the graceful movement
of creepers, with their rows of teeth (looking) like white flowers
(on the creepers),
754. Who, in respectful devotion for the worship of Cupid,
always favouring them with His presence (by their side), draw on
their own bodies, (a painting of) a red Asoka tree, as it were, full
of blossoms, in the form of fresh (reddish) nail-marks,
755. Dressed in an attractive, green apparel, put on for the
special occasion (of love-tryst), who exhibit, by their straight
(tapering) thighs, the interior stems of plantain trees with all
their faultless equipment (of fluttering, green leaves),
756. Of whom, as they lower down their moon-like faces, it
appears as if their heart throbs, as it were, showing under the guise
of their lower lips bitten (by their lovers ), vivid sores of wounds
caused by Cupid's shafts, on their bosom,
757. The middle (gaping) portion of the bodice (kuppusa).
lit up by the lustre of the space between the two (slightly exposed)
breasts, looks like the upper (oblong) erect eye of Siva, held impri-
soned by these women, for (having caused) the destruction of
(their Patron-God) Cupid.
758. On whose breasts, the nail-mark with its impression
(sivesa) (surface) broken by horripitation, looks like a seam
(sivani) sewn over the heart at the dread of a moment's separation,
759. Who look beautiful with a pair of their rounded breasts,
swelling (at the prospect of) getting (from the lover) a close
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 382 =====
The Graceful dalliance of Ladies
85
embrace, thus looking very much like a pair of wheels of the
Cupid's chariot heading towards their lover,
760. Who look at their feet which were being confused
(mujjhante), (mistaken) by a fancied identification (avara)
with Campaka buds, thus appearing as if they (feet) have been
clasped by rows of lamps, (falling down for protection) through
the fear of (extinguishing) blows from their ear-lotuses,
761. Who, with the contracted (kinia) position of eye-
lids (pamha) because of jealousy, (roused) after having drunk
their lover at the first sight, hold him encaged, as it were, (in their
eyes) for fear of his escaping,
762. Who, with the rays of their teeth tinged slightly red by
the rosy lustre of their lower lip and spreading over their breasts,
look lovely, appearing as if (they have white) bandages soaked
in blood, tied over the wounds (on the bosom inflicted) by Cupid,
763. Whose braids of hair (arranged) in rows, (proving)
by their length and thick abundance, very (handy and) useful
for the sole purpose of binding (ävedhaya) the hands tight,
inspire a strong (bala) desire (in the heart of their lovers) for
seizing their hair,
764. Who bathe (and wash) clean, as it were, even the
image of their sinning lover (reflected) in their broad cheeks,
(thinking it to be) infected (avakalusia) by his close contact with
another woman,
765. Who, just at the (proper) time, untie their golden
girdle, with its ends (edges) (polished) bright by constant (sai)
wearing (samghatta), fixing their beaming eyes on the face of their
lover,
766. Who, with their bosom filled with a thick accumulation
of pollen (fallen) from flowers on their ears tossed in anger, appear
to be sprinkling (healing) powder, as it were, over the wounds
(inflicted) by Cupid, now (in the process of) getting slightly
healed up (cured),
767. Who, with the necklace and rings on the fingers of
hands placed on the bosom, starting to jingle on account of tremour
(caused by love's excitement), possess (a peculiar aspect of) the
body by which, though being only in one place (without having
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 383 =====
86
Gaüdavaho
moved away), they had (as it were) their girdle and anklets
producing jingling sounds,
768. Who, with their eye-lashes in various subsidiary colours
(uvaraga), having been mingled with the rays of multi-coloured
gems set in their ear-ornaments, appear to draw a painting of their
lover as it were, with colour-brushes (vanaat lilla),
769. Who, with a brighter aspect of the body viewed in one
(frontal) direction on account of the lustrous rays (shooting)
from the toes of their feet, look charming like lovely stage-curtains
(lit up by foot-lights), soft for touch (parimāsa),
770. Whose eyes, with eye-lashes quivering in the tremulous
grace of love's dalliance, appear to fly towards their lover, as it
were, with the flapping ends of their caving (sampula) wings,
771. Who, with the rays of their clear, white teeth, meeting
(falling upon) the lower lip of their lover (sitting) near them,
appear to be sipping the nectar-juice (rasāsava) from his mouth
with graceful (tender) (straws of) lotus-fibres,
772. With these girls the King's playful acts of gallantry.
(lalian), thrilling with the excitement of heart being carried away
by fresh passion, as seen in their eyes (ditthirña) and pursued
(anubajjhamtaim) (and prolonged) by his merits (of
attraction), appeared very amusing.
773. The rounded (plump) breasts of a pretty, young girl,
becoming wheel-shaped on his chest under the pressure of an
embrace, attained the beauty of lotus-leaves, gracefully placed (on
the bosom) under moistened (allaa) conditions.
774. Indifferent to his many other merits, these young girls
(satisfied their thirst) by drinking in the handsome appearance
of his physical form only. Who (cares to) search for the flower
of a Damanaka plant when its leaves are so fragrant?
775. His eyes rested for a moment on the rounded buttocks
of the lovely ladies, where their garment became tight (nibiḍia)
on account of their girdle being pressed (lowered) down by the
left hand (of the king).
776. (A girl's) laughter, a face with rolling eyes (bhamia-
ccham), cheeks pale-white like a fresh Bakula flower and buttocks
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 384 =====
Playful Acts of Gallantry
with the girdle undiscarded (anibbhacchia), constitute the life-
breath of love's romance.
777. Bright flashes a crest-decoration of flowers (of a girl)
placed on the head, where moist locks of hair (after bath) have
spread (vivaisya) all along the ear-rings overreaching (vilamghia)
her shoulders.
778. The lotus-like face (of a girl) looks attractive, with
saffron rouge wiped over the lower lip (but) preserved on the
fringes (edge-lines) and with eye-brows emerging in black (lustre),
having been combed (vilihia) with nails.
779. The ear-decoration (uttamsa), (consisting) of a fresh
Asoka flower hanging down from the ears over the broad cheeks,
gains in charm, (as it goes) over the path of eye-corners (avanga)
marked by lines of musk-pigment (maandhipamika).
780. The broad bosom (of a girl) presents a happy sight
(suhüvel), with its white upper garment overspread (vicchuria)
with the glitter (chavi) of the inner necklace of gems,
(beautified, as it is) with a decoration of a collection (garland)
of black and white (sabala) flowers placed above.
781. Thus attracts the bevy (sattha) of his beloveds breath-
ing the fragrance of betel leaves (chewed), mingled with that of
wine sipped (cakkhia) in small quantity.
782. His eye rests on the lips (dasanavāsa) of the beautiful
young girls, (quivering) with agitation (sommaha-sonmatha) and
bright with rouge (räujjala), looking pale-white like wells with cranes.
783. The colour-paint (räavicchitti), pink like a fresh Bakula
flower, flashes (emerges) on the lower lip, on which is laid a thick
coating (samivesa) of wax (maana), to prevent the biting
effects of cold.
784. Their enthusiasm for adorning themselves on (the
occasions of) their momentary meetings (vaiara) (unions) soli-
cited (maggia) for the first time, passes on to the garlands of
Päratti flowers interwoven with clusters of Marubaka blossoms,
(turned) pale-white with frost absorbed (in them).
785. A saffron-shade, soft and delicate like the rising moon
(maamkarambha), shines on their faces, bristling (dantura) with
the remaining lines of brownish, dotted drops of musk.
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 385 =====
88
Gaüdavaho
786. The lovely charm languishes over their hair-braids,
decorated with Damanaka petals, interspersed with variegated clus
ters of Marubaka (Marjoram) clusters, with a few browned Kunda
flowers still retained over them, although crushed (and faded).
787. Thus does, in winter, the lovely band of his beauties
attract (the eye), as they take up for a crest-decoration a Priyamgu
flower blossoming at the end (bhamge) of the night, while their
(earlier) charming decoration is all crushed (and faded during
the night).
788. The wind makes the (hollow) tips of mango blossoms
whistle (Jhanakkärei), full of pollen-powder, as they are, inside
their buds, which cling loosened (on their stems), having been
pushed by (the formation of) fruit coming out now.
789. The evening time (sayam..kälo) spreads (virallei)
the perfume-less (apamoam) smell of the Saptala (double jasmine)
flowers, when sprinkled with water, their (tiny) buds, coming
out, having to be noticed with (an attentive) mind.
790. The clean fragrance of the Madhavi blossoms slightly
wears out (vi) (lit. dries up), with only a single faded flower
surviving (in the whole cluster), as (the blossoms) are being
enmeshed (jadila) in (a layer of) knotted fruit.
791. Thus do the parks, situated on the outskirts of the city,
delight him in the company of his beloveds attending (on him).
during these days, happy, as they are, with the rich development
of the glory of spring.
Moreover,
792. The beauty of cheeks, bright like the tender leaves of a
Kharjūra tree, green at the borders, fully comes out, as coollyrium
flows down over them along with tears from the corners of their
eyes.
793. The eyes with black pupils inside (antotārām) and with
their white parts forming thin lines when slightly closing, so as
to depress the middle portion (majjhonaa), attain the bright charm
of the new (crescent) moon.
794. The lower lip dries up (pariviai) a little, its protruding
shape becoming conspicuous because of emaciated (khama) cheeks,
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 386 =====
Bappai-ria, the Poet
thus looking bright like pollen-particles (kaya) of the Karketana
(Bimba) fruit.
795. A condition of becoming slightly thin (viralattand)
(loose and wide apart), as in the case of filament-threads of a fresh
Bakula flower, (scorched) red by the (sun's) heat, comes over
the young girl's breasts, which look pale-white through loss of
strength (because of exhaustion).
796. Thus does his eye rest on these young girls who, in their
innocence (muddhabhava) indulged in continuous enjoyment (to
satisfy) their sexual desire (maana) for the first time, languid
as they are (now), in their covert (wihua) dalliance (with him).
797. Then, of this king on whose pillar-like arms rested
(simia) the burden of the whole world, there was (a Poet called
Bappai-Raa (Vakpätiraja) who, although decorated with the
distinctive title (indha) of Kaviraja, was a drop in (the ocean of)
his favourites.
798. Although insipid, he felt himself prominent with only
this much that he was being held in high esteem by the honoured
Poet Kamalayudha.
799. Whose special (poetic) features flash forth in his
literary compositions (kahanivesa) even to-day, appearing like
spray-particles of poetic nectar, churned out from the ocean of
Bhavabhuti's (works),
800. Who (found) great delight in Bhasa, Jvalanamitra,
Kantideva, in Raghukara (i. e. Kalidasa, the author of Raghuvamia)
and in the literary compositions of Subandhu and Haricandra,
801. Whose graceful display of (poetic) speech (givilasia)
is a veritable painting (in words), steeped in sentiment, soft
(lonan) (for the tongue) to handle (i. e. recite ), full of substance
(säravamta), ever-lasting, brilliant and solid in its shadow (of sense
i.e. thought).
802. Those well-versed in Scriptures, in (the science of)
Speech (Grammar) and in Metre (Prosody), those among whom
Bharata (author of Natya-Sastra) and Gautama (the propounder
of the Nyaya System of Philosohy) are prominent, the writers of
legendary narratives (such as Mahabharata and the Puranas), as
also (great) poets of substance give him (perennial) joy,
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 387 =====
Gaüdavaho
803. Whose (listeners), expecting to provide empty space
(room) (ovisa) for more poetic excellences, push down, with
heads nodded in wonder, whatever good utterances (already heard)
still stay in their ears after having fully filled them (ears).
804. Such a poet (that he is) has been asked, with eye-lashes
widening in wonder, (to speak about our King) at a time when
life-stories of good men are narrated by the learned men (gathered
and) sitting in an assembly.
805. Sega holds up the circle of his hoods, suppressed by
the pressure of the earth, which is put down (ohura) by the weight
of water, his swelling (visaffa) throat remaining contracted.
806. The (mighty) pillar-like trunks, held upward (uddha)
for a moment by the Quarter-elephants drowning in the (deluge)
waters, look like thick columns of comets (dhamakeu) shooting
up (to indicate) world's destruction.
807. The oceans (maarahara), with the sun's orb floating
in the interior of the billows surging up (soaring) on the path of
the sky, appear to possess the submarine fires (breaking out inside).
808. The masses of the deluge-clouds, with streaks of
lightning coils dropping out, are being gulped now by water, in
revenge (sanura) as it were, since the clouds had been drinking
water every day (in the past).
809. The sun, being pushed up (samvellia) by the waves,
is being presented, as it were, by the ocean (to serve) as a big
lamp to the God Murar! (Visņu), who has taken up his bed inside
the watery abode.
810. Quite different became the colours and the tastes of all
oceans mixing (samvalamita) with one another, strange and
peculiar like a unique (aiivva) concoction (cocktail) of milk and
liquors.
811. The mountain Meru sinks (under water), with the
noisy hosts of gods collecting together, some of them having
ascended and some ascending the tops (of the mountain), while
the loud gurgling sounds of water (kalaala) were gradually sub-
siding, as its caves were (being) filled (with water).
812. The Three-eyed God (Siva) steps into the crescent
Moon, as if in a silvery boat, as he (the Moon), (usually) over
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 388 =====
Universal Deluge
91
His head, now dropped down at His feet, in the confusion (created)
by the whole universe being flooded with deluge waters.
813. There was no feeling of distress (aulabhava) for the
Self-born (Brahma), although His faces were overflooded
(pavvalia) by the water of the oceans, since he was used to controll-
ing his breathing by continuous Yogic meditation.
814. The God Murári (Visņu) who, when all other gods
were afflicted (with distress) on the divine mountain, which, too,
started moving, being (violently) splashed by the deluge waters,
became the safe (anaha) resort of the three worlds.
815. (And this King) whose smoke-line from sacrificial fires,
with the sun joined (ghalia) at its top and showing its bottom
(on the earth) with his rays, appears like a tall palm plant having
only one reddish fruit,
816. This our (King), acclaimed (accepted) in the world
by his (nick-) name Vigraha-tunga (Lofty-bodied), is known to
be an integral part (and portion) that has flowed out from Him
(Vishnu), the enemy of the race of the great demon.
Or rather,
817. The massive layer of clouds drops away shattered by
the thrust (pellasa) of his (Garuda's) body, meeting in a violent
impact at his upward flight, thus looking like a cluster of fragments
(saalajala) of the Universe, disjointed (vihadla) at that moment.
818. Snapped pieces of lightning-strings, released by dis-
integrating clouds and missing the aerial car (of Visnu) that has
turned away (pariatta), glide down with the charm of a graceful
flutter of his (Garuda's) own wings falling off from his body.
819. There was a flight, in the sky, of the winged mountains
that were tossed up in the air from the sea agitated by the force
of the speed (of Garuda's flight), appearing like big birds joining
him in companionship (sähemta).
820. The path of the sun (suvanna-suparsa), red with the
radiating lustre of jewels (treasured) at the bottom of the ocean,
opened out (ugghädia) by the violent speed (of Garuda), appears
as if it is trodden (beaten-pollia) by Aruna flying first (ahead of
the sun.)
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 389 =====
92
Gaüdavaho
821. The lords of snakes look beautiful, as they fanned
(viambhamta) the flames of the poison-fires, doubled (in volume)
by their rise of wrath, (the fire-flames) appearing like Garuda's
feathers, slightly bitten off and being chewed (by them) in their
mouths.
822. The stance (thiam) of Ananta (Sesa), by which the
globe of the earth is held motionless, resting, as before, on his main
(basic) hood, while attacking (ahiutta) Garuda with the other
hoods, looks striking (sahal).
823. The (piercing) thrusts of claws (sahanivil) by the
Lord of birds (Garuda ), although hard as thunderbolt, prove
futile (blunt) on Väsuki's chest, hardened, as it is, by the tough
scar (formed) by the friction of the Mandara Mountain.
824. The hooded cobras feel sorry (visürenti) (frustrated)
to find that contacts with the Lord of birds, being repelled (osaria)
by their own furious hisses (sumkara), could not be effected
(napalanta), their anger being doubly increased because of
ineffective (vihala) excitement of Mouths (itching for attack).
825. With the massive columns of trunks, noisy with (hissing)
breaths, being (twisted and) rolled about by the Quarter-elephants
rushing in bewilderment, the nether world draws away, appearing
as if it is bent down (namiam) under (the burden of) all snake-
families resting (for shelter) on the body of Sea (sesattha).
826. Thus was He (the King), in his incarnation of Krsna
(Visnu), carried (vubbhai) respectfully by the son of Vinats
(i. e. Garuda), who acquired prominent glory for having shaken
off multitudes of (poisonous) cobras.
Morcover
827. Variegated (karambia) with lighting-filaments in the
form of (flashing) sword-blades (being brandished) by Vidya-
dharas roaming about in confusion, the sky bristles luminous and
fierce, as if with massive columns of hair (cltura), upraised and
erect (to mark) a portentous occurrence.
828. The moon carries a cluster of stars glued over his orb
(bimbaghadia), looking like rows of the tiny fangs of Rahu
(vidappa), bitten (into the moon) in the act of making a morsel
of him and chewing it.
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 390 =====
Dreadful Portents
93
829. The sun's orb, pierced by (the black body of) Ketu,
thus looking (from the earth) like a hole (vivarābha), droops
down in the sky, resembling in lustre an anklet tossed away from
the foot of Laksmi, the Goddess of the three worlds, as she kicked
in anger.
830. The sun's orb, (looking) distressed (jambala) by the
blood discharged by its rays, appears like Brahms's unripe Primor-
dial Egg covered by oozing yolk (kalala), because of sudden
(atthakka) bursting.
831. The victorious steeds started neighing, black smoke
being emitted in violent breaths, mingled with black lustre, as it
were, from the morsels of bridles filling their mouths every day.
832. Such were the dreadful portents in the world when this
(King) had his eye-corners (avanga) twitching (bhangura) in
frowns (formed) by the knitting of creeper-like eye-brows for
a moment at that time.
And what is more
833. The low-hanging flower-garland, with its loops
(kumḍala) fixed upto the girdle-string and being dangled about
by tremulous (jerky) things in their movements, delights (the
eye).
834. The locks of hair, the lower halves of which were
loaded (garuia) with chaplets of Priyamgu blossoms fastened on
them, fluttered about, loose and dishevelled in their strenuous
exertion (to do wild) improper (unscientific) dances (läsa).
835. The decoration of Damanaka blossoms, tinged reddish
by the fine dust of scented powder (pitthaaa) applied to the bossom,
looks charming, bristling (dantura), as it does, with lovely
Madhavi buds.
836. The eyes, languid (parisidhila) with eye-lashes becom-
ing slightly heavy (garudanta) and greyish with the dust of
perfumed powder (palavisa), roll about, blinking dim (virala)
and reddish, as they do, with the effects of the intoxication of
wines.
837. Thus does the band of his beloveds, in pleasure-houses
(pamai-bhavaya), amuse him, their vigorous zest for love-sports
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 391 =====
94
Gaüdavaho
greatly increasing in (the course of the celebration of) Cupid's
festival, (inventing) novel forms (navaviläsa) of indulgence (in
love).
838. (The King) before whom man's merits, though
complete (and perfect-samatta) appear incomplete (and im-
perfect), halted, as they happen to be, (in the absence of) their
proper growth and recognition, denied to them, because of their
small (limited) field (of activity).
839. (Enemies' wives by whom), wiping (säravemti) their
face, greyish like the winter moon, the cheeks having been afflicted
by their pervasion (paribhoa) by overpowering (pahuppanta)
dust, because of their sleeping on bare ground,
840. Restraining (in a knot) the locks (nivesa) of hair,
made thread-bare (jajjara) by sighs breathed over them (sivesa)
and diminishing (madahia) (the broad size of) the forehead with
their (over-spreading) ends (pamhagga), shooting out (in curls)
from the roots in the absence of dressing (and combing-
asamūrana).
841. Casting their eyes, softened (somma) and eager with
tears of new joy (at the King's sight), the enclosing layers (parivesa)
of their eye-lashes becoming dulled (and heavy) with the clinging
particles of tears, although somehow (jahataha) wiped away,
842. Having a lower lip without (the colour of) betel-
leaves (ajhasuram), (no longer being chewed) and yet more
pinkish, as the skin (formed) over bite-wounds (cuduppa) has
been (recently) removed and with a delicate sprout-like finger
rested (on the lip) in an embarrassed, vacant (state of mind).
843. Thus is this (King) looked up to by the captive women
of his enemies in their impetuous eagerness, their agonies having
been halted for the moment (in the act of) conjuring (nimmäa)
the (image of the) God of Love in their heart.
844. These people (here) wish to be told (sisamta) by you,
leaving no detail, (the narrative of) how the Magadha king was
put an end to (witthavio) by such a lofty one as (our King) is.
845. Then, smiling gently, he said (in words which) clearly
expressed his benign, good nature: "The hearts of the pure-
(minded) are necessarily averse to hypocrisy (kaivȧa) (deceit )."
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 392 =====
The Earth as a Cow
95
846. "Emotional upheavals of grief, sustained in the heart,
are somehow passed off (borne) by the firm-minded. The great
joy, however, does somehow thrill the bodies of even the great
ones."
847. "In my (attempts to) praise the Master, my speech,
although repeated, just wriggles (and rolls) round inside the
throat, having been halted by the distressing delight, thus appearing
as if it is incapable (of the task)."
Moreover
848. With the circle of his bloated hoods, Seja fills the empty
void within (antovāsa), (created by the Earth leaving him to
escape in the form of a cow), as his long body goes out (extending)
in the form of his tail at the back (to hold the Earth).
849. The Tortoise himself, his mouth hidden (inside his
body), assumes the form (and shape) of her (cow's) udder
(ävina), with her quadruple teats created out of his four feet, and
the lustre of whose nails looked like (oozing) milk.
850. Immediately the role of the calf (tamaa) with his up-
lifted mouth was taken up by the Boar (Kaula) (the incarnation
of) Visnu (veuntha), whose blunted snout (ghond) was being
twisted about high (in the air) when first tilted up (padhamu
tthamghana).
851. Only the thick, accumulated mass of darkness from the
nether world goes out in the way (nature) of smoke, (being
expelled) in waves by the bellows (of the Earth-Cow as a result)
of the spasms (parivadi) of her bodily pain.
852. The Sumeru mountain, loosened from its uprooted
foundation (vinivesa) and dropping down over the path of the
nether world, bears similarity (süreccha) with the fresh essence
of the yellow (Gorocans) pigment (on the Cow's forehead).
853. With her form (and nature) completely changed at
this moment, the region of her mouth, bristling with grass. play-
fully picked up in mouthfuls, looks like the (same) region over
which (earlier) tufts (of grass) had slightly sprouted up.
854. At the bottom, Sesa appears to have (mustered strong),
with all his brood (collected to-gether), under the guise of the
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 393 =====
96
Gaüdavaho
big streams of milk flowing out (from her udder), out of his concern
for bearing the heavy load (of the Earth).
855. The Lord of this Earth (Prthu), by whom this earth
(was protected) when she had strayed away in the graceful form
of a cow assumed in the wake of chaos and was later characterised
by his own name,
856. A comparison even of this (our) King with him (Prthu)
is no good. Whom would entertain insipid stories of the glori-
fication of those other kings, whom the performance of good (and
brave) deeds has evaded (in their life).
857. Prosperity, growing in abudance, spoils even those who
just equate it (proseperity) with jewellery. The frosty shower,
although of similar properties, pales the lustre of the moon.
858. With vain (moha), (flattering) praises (salahä), men
in authority are so (played upon and) mocked (velavijjanti)
by rascals that they (begin to) entertain peculiar notions about
themselves, although what actual merits (they have) are too patent
(pivvalia).
859. Acquisition of merits is quite easy for great kings who
can be patrons of the men of merits (saguna). Whence, however,
are merits possible for the poor, by whom ways and means have
to be sought (to acquire them)?
860. This is the secret of wealth that people, who set their
heart solely on finding (ideal) good behaviour (in others), de
not realise themselves straying away from virtues.
861. Men in power cannot bear the (purest) essence of
character (which is too good for them); nor do they pick up lapses
(in others) through proper discrimination. They rest satisfied
(sisammanti) listening to (reports of what basically is) a moral
lapse (dosa), but is given the form and appearance of virtuous
conduct.
862. Man's pure character, howsoever pleasing, dries up
(in him), if associated with poverty (avihava) and unrecognised
(agahia) by the society, like a flower growing close on top of
the fruit.
863. It is surprising (acchariam) that kings who are suspi
cious and vigilant in guarding the (privacy and) secrecy of their "
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 394 =====
Merits and Demerits
97
wealth and wives, keep a class of low people close in attendance
(on themselves).
864. Look at this contradiction: wine, taken in a large
measure (baku), intoxicates (maei); its small quantity does not.
Wealth, however, even a little of it, gives intoxication (vanity);
but not so, if in plenty.
865. Even people, with proved virtues, lose their virtues
when they become rich. Men without virtues, however, go (miles)
away (dure) from virtues, if they obtain wealth.
866. Some people, mean-minded, seek to obtain richness
through merits; others of pure behaviour, however, want to acquire
merits through wealth!
867. Houses there are where (only) the servants are wicked,
or where the masters (alone) are rogues, or where both (servants
and masters) are villainous. Consider such houses as successively
hard and difficult (to deal with).
868. As much (and as long) as these men in power, although
wanting in (thought and) discrimination, keep away from the
great with their faces turned against them, so much (and so long)
they (have a chance of) picking up some merits in themselves.
869. These good men, with all their merits, have become so
unsuccessful with all the people that even (if they eschew virtue),
their behaviour (otherwise), full of lapses (in morals), will not
now bring them any credit (greatness).
870. Taken as merits, even bad traits yield manifest fruit
(reward) with kings; since (jai) they cannot understand what
is bad about these traits, having been represented (to them) as
good points.
871. (in their dealings) with fools, feeling (sore and) dis-
gusted by incidents (vaiara), in which their excellence of merit
and judgment is not understood (and appreciated), good men
retire to the forests from their native villages.
872. Whole day, good men are filled with two-fold grief:
that they had not (the good fortune) to be born in an age when
good men prospered and that they are now born in the age (ruled
by) the vile and the wicked.
G. 7
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 395 =====
98
Gaüdavaho
873. Granting interviews and close contacts (pasamga) to
men of intelligence and of good conduct, these (rich) men of
power feel that whatever has been their own benefit was also the
benefit of these (good) men too!
874. Any other man of wealth enjoys pleasures, associated
with graceful forms of (dignified) entertainment (liläsaha); (in
the case of these autocratic men, however), power (or authority)
is vindicated in just doing things nonsensical (asamamjasa).
875. The heart of great men, although upset (amdolanta)
by disrespect (shown to them) by men in authority, quietens,
however, at the sight of the wretched villains (being treated) with
great honour.
876. If at all, (of) the meritorious, some of them, appear to
have been favoured with some space inside the royal palaces, it is
just their commonality on par with all and sundry; or may be,
(they have been so admitted) for some (ulterior) motive even.
877. Why do good men seek to evoke (admiration and)
respect for those very merits from kings, because of which alone
they become objects of hatred (vesabhäva) (and contempt) with
them?
878. Who is not averse to the meritless? Whom do the
meritorious not cause pain (of envy and jealousy)? The only
man who lives in peace and happiness (of obscurity, undisturbed
by inconvenient attention), is the one who has no merit in him
or-the one who is not meritless (and is not obtrusive.)
879. (The fact) that the heart of men in authority recoils
from great and good men, feeling impatient and intolerant (nisaha)
of the high honour being done to them, is on par with a man's
desire to free himself of all jewelled ornaments (on his person)
for fear of (having to bear) their heavy load (on the body)!
880. Men without merit are (quite vocal in) praising others'
merit, afraid, as they are, of (the charge of incapacity and) want
of judgment (being levelled at them). (Accomplished) men
of power, however, who have themselves acquired merits, are most
malicious and crooked (väma) in respect of others' merits.
881. Every one, ambitious of (establishing) his own eminence
(ukkarisa) in merit, possesses jealous enthusiasm (maccharu-
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 396 =====
Merits and Demerits
cchaha) (in running down others). Those are wretched and
wicked, however, who, themselves meritless, cannot bear acclama-
tion (uggūra) of the merits of the other people.
882. Even with a little of (superficial) good behaviour, one
is taken to be a good man (suapatta) by people roundabout. Very
difficult, however, to satisfy (and please) one's own (heart and) soul.
883. How, indeed, is it possible even for the humble-hearted
(vinayatthia) to leave off all (legitimate) pride of their own merits?
Even if so set aside, the same (pride) throbs (and vibrates) with
a double force inside the heart.
884. I do not know what possibly the good men, being hurt
(dumijjamtā), (feel and) think in their hearts. They will not,
however, proceed to acts (of violence in revenge) even against
the (worst) offender.
885. Virtues (by contrast) lay down (the limit) of the
maximum depravity (mahimam) of vices, while vices establish
the greatness (and glory) of virtues. If what are the (advantages
and) benefits (gund) of vices, would also be the benefits of virtues,
then my salutation (homage) to them (virtues)!
886. Even the wicked play the good man and even good men
show (by outward appearances) wickedness. This alone is
the (limiting) boundary line (of degradation) for virtues vibrat-
ing (in them) far (and deep).
887. Even after having indulged in (a life of) vices, it is
possible for one to (salvage and) establish oneself on (the path
of) virtues; on the other hand, the mind of men, well-known for
their virtues, stays not in (an atmosphere of) vices (even for a
minute).
888. A good man, although totally bereft of virtues, takes his
place (in society) in common with other (low) men. On a
(dried up) mango tree, the sap of which has oozed away, it has
a purpose (to serve, of giving thick shade).
889. The surfaces of mirrors, (being used) by ladies are
made of silver. Men's mirror, however, is good men of pious
character (and behaviour).
890. A wicked man has (shows up) his dreadful trait else-
where, even if taken away from his words (tongue). A blado
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 397 =====
100
Gaüdavaho
of Darbha grass retains its harshness (sharpness) in its edges,
although gone away from its tip.
891. It is this very quality of judgement (and discrimination)
that, makes for wickedness in bad men who, having realised the
excellence of merits in others, become doubly distressed.
892. It is, indeed, a delusion (moha) (mistaken notion)
that by the deprecation of merits in others, one's own merits will
get a fillip (payatlanti). It is one's own greatness, that serves for
the greatness of one's merits.
893. How (and why) should the totally meritless have a
Teeling (of self-consciousness) of their own greatness, when even
lofty men of merits become degraded, as it were, by such a feeling
being harboured (vubbhante) by them?
894. Greatness being the result of merits, bad men, laying
stress on their (so called) greatness resulting from no merits,
expect from merits (or want of them) quite a contrary creation.
895. Vanity, born of merits, never travels to the hearts of
good men. Hence do their merits remain great, (as they should),
without having brought out resulting vanity (aivvuthamaa).
896. The dirt of jealousy remains only so long, as long as
thought (vivea) has not clearly dawned (on the mind). As soon
as the divine fire blazes up, the (earlier) smoke goes away.
897. There is wonder when looking up high and fear when
Booking deep down below, as (of people) gazing at a mountain
and (when) peeping inside a well.
898. I wish to make myself relieved of all merits (I have)
for fear of the wicked, as I would throw away a garland
of flowers, (apprehending) its provocation (samkhoha) (being
caused) to the poisonous snakes.
899. Observing how a man gets elated for merits, although
the greatness (and glory) of his merits has remained unsung
(avahigia), even those men (the fame of) whose merits has gone
over the whole world, (begin to) waver (with apprehension)
about themselves.
900. A man with merits feels no concern (attachment) for
a man of wealth, while men of wealth do not bother about men of
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 398 =====
Merits and Demerits
101
high merits. Mutually they consider one another as insignificant
(men of straw), like people, dwelling on the top of mountains,
(looking down) on people at the base and vice versa.
901. Kings are not so self-conscious of their greatness in
respect of the highly (accomplished) men of great merits, as they
appear to be full of pride with other kings.
902. The more these virtues are not being valued and the
more the vices are now to thrive, the more will the world be de-
void of virtues (and values), since they (virtues) cease to command
respect.
903. What of these (mortal) kings? The great (saintly)
men who are left with no attachment, having, in their high thought,
done away with all desire, stand up, with their loins girded up in
firm courage, even against destiny.
904. Even when fate shows a slight (adverse) activity, low
people break into pieces by their own movement, as if (they are)
on a sharp edge (blade) of an iron wheel, like a piece of wood on
a rotating saw.
905. The light of knowledge alone shows up the insignifi-
cance (visuraam) of bad minds, like the flash of lustre, which by
itself white, (brings to light the blackishness) of black gems.
906. Because of their broadened hearts, thoughts of great
men never become known out-side. Lamps, (shedding) mild
rays, (roll and) reel about (with their lustre confined) within the
big mansions.
907. Even with great (and powerful) lustre (vica)
(which they possess), the wishes (and thoughts) of great men
do not fructify (or materialise). The flash of lightning dazzles
the eyes by its mighty blaze.
908. Not that those who gather wealth themselves (on the
strength of their merits) are not worthy of respect; but then, those,
by whom poverty is (willingly) accepted, are some (rare and
superior) men.
909. Some do not reach (the stage of) praise; some (great
men) are seen to be beyond any praise. Praise thus stands mid-
way between some others (of low merits) and men highly respect-
able.
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 399 =====
102
Gaüdavaho
910. Death, even if (ja) angry, does just the opposite (in
the life) of great men, who welcome death and (voluntarily) give
away all their wealth of their own accord.
911. Not only did (these) great men, who used the world as a
means (to achieve) greatness, not attain high position of authority,
but they could not be instrumental even (for others to achieve
such position), because of the fault of the present (Kali) Age.
912. 1 believe it to be the shadow of the Krta age immedia-
tely following (The present Kali age); since something, pure and
chaste, does flash (occasionally), inspite of the overpowering
influence of this Kali age.
913. What concern have we with those houses where a man
just enters in all zest and haste, only (to find in them) his hopes
shattered? Those houses alone are (commendable), out of which
a man comes out filled with great satisfaction.
914. He gives up nobility (of heart) and abandons courtesy
and sympathy. Even the earth, shrinking and drawing away from
some such people, is polluted by the touch of their sins.
915. When a thing, quite easy for even an ordinary man (to
get), has no chance of materialising (sampaḍdi) in the case of
great men, they just smile to themselves inwardly and secretly
and sit still in surprise.
916. Great men (magnify when they) show to the good men
the gifts they received, (telling them that) they have far exceeded
their expectation, like the reflection of great (precious) gems seen
through a layer (viņivesa) of wax (maana).
917. Bad men delight in the company of low people, although
good men are at their disposal (sahina). It is a frivolous freak
(lila) (whim) of those, for whom jewels are easy to have, to wear
glass beads.
918. How can Poverty assail great men who go on investing
at every place (or worthy person)? The miser's wealth, how-
ever, (remains) all alone (uninvested) by itself; and when once
gone away (lock, stock and barrel), all its roots (traces) are
wiped away (obliterated).
919. For misers praising (ahisalihamina) merits of muni-
ficence in others, there is no enthusiasm in themselves for doing
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 400 =====
The Class of Misers
103
any charity (iace); nor, strangely enough, is there any feeling
of shame even.
920. Their wealth (Lakṣmi), like a newly married girl, is
slow (and hesitating) for the first coition, though able to bear
(the strain of) a fuller enjoyment (with them); for this reason,
others also cannot indulge in love-sports with their wealth, even
after having secured access to her (wealth).
921. The misers stay away without even touching Laksmi,
although within reach by their side, looking upon her as their
beloved (in menses) to be avoided (pariharavaïm), having an
unclean appearance (person).
922. Men, who have acquired (in themselves) great merits,
look down upon great (Laksml) as most insignificant (and of no
consequence); hence is Laksmi's (hatred and) hostility towards
merits, not without reason, of course.
923. That Laksmi does not hasten to meet the good man'
although commanded by him with (the signal of) his knitted eye-
brows, is, I think, due to the fact that she stumbles over (in the
act of) rushing towards him in her impetuousity (to meet him).
924. She, too, in the absence of a good man, would face
extinction, having no support left (for her). This, unfortunately,
is a painful bereavement for Laksmi, never wished for (by her).
925. Born of Dharma (Righteousness), how could Laksmi
be the hater of good men? Those are Alakṣmis (opposites of
Laksmi), looking very much like Laksmi, who abide with the
ignoble.
926. Lakṣmls that are ample, are lasting and have brightened
in their constant use for enjoyment, belong only to men of piety,
and never to others (of bad behaviour).
927. She takes away (man's) faults and confers merits (on
him); covers up his defects and gives him prominence (in the
public eye). Such peculiar dispensation (vimaso), apparently
contradictory, is to be observed in the case of Lakṣmi.
928. Those (warriors), who on the battlefield (success-
fully) confront the sharp blades of the swords of enemies, are
blessed with the touch of Laksmi (who is) forced to stay there.
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 401 =====
14
104
Gaüdavaho
929. Good men, having for long habituated (kailsamgha )
their one (right) arm only, under the guise of acts of smashing
and smiting (solely with its help), keep back, as it were, in haughti-
ness, even the other hand.
930. Between wealth and merits, merits alone, methinks,
are wicked, and not wealth. For Laksmi accommodates merits,
but merits do not, (since they hate her).
931. That merits are the root-cause of Laksmi, the creeper
is a fact fully established; since they (merits) are alone forced
down deep (underground), when Laksmi (develops) a prosperous
growth.
932. Who (Laksml), giving to the restless (visamthula)
(suitors), languishing (and recoiling) in nervous fear, the igno-
miny (of rejection), has at the very outset planted her stumbling
feet by the side of the Destroyer of the (Demon) Madhu (Visņu),
933. How would she, the fickle one, open out her eyes wide
(akmiam) on those men, resplendent with merits, compressed
(samvähia) as they are, by the darkness of the nether world
where She (Lakṣml) stayed for a long time?
934. At her (lit. whose) very (celebration in the) begin-
ning, even the glow of wealth (Laksmi) vanishes. How then could
the other one (Laksmi ), with all prayerful imploring, rejoin (the
man left already)?
935. Absence of unhappiness is no happiness, nor do (worldly)
pleasures (give) happiness. Happiness (that dawns), after
eschewing such pleasures (of the senses), is the real happiness.
936. In (the heart's) inordinate addiction to pleasures, un-
happiness becomes all the more poignant. The shadow gains
in thickness in the powerful brilliance of light.
937. (Heart's) attachment to pleasures constantly throbs
within, although the mind has been forcibly turned away from
pleasures. Sound, uninterrupted, is (to be heard) within the
ears though blocked by fingers.
938. Hearts of great men find happiness even when torm-
ented by their own conditions of unhappiness, like those (hearts)
of poets pouring out pathos in compositions full of sentiment.
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 402 =====
Ways of the World
105
939. Men of high and steady hearts (ahirahia) look upon.
the families (of their birth) as mere (temporary) resting places
of sojourn, to which, one after another (amannim), they come in
their unending life of (soul's) migration.
940. (Ordinary) people lighten their misery in sighs pro-
duced by unhappiness, as does an elephant who overcomes his
exhaustion by blowing out spray with effort (from his trunk).
941. That the tear-drops come out (of the eyes) under the
guise of joy at a meeting of the dear relations is (an indication of)
the fact that the hearts start (melting and) trickling under (the
impact of) the fright of (impending) bereavement.
942. O fool, how can there be any relaxation (and release)
for you, when fastened by the bonds of love and affection, which
(jo) would only tighten up firmly on you, as you (try to) stretch
(rayanta) them to extricate yourself (from them)?
943. The get-togethers of people, which once had become-
very close, having cut short all distance, (dissolve and) develop
remoteness of great distance and are thus like the two ends of a
loosened girdle.
944. In the first (formative stage of life) there are (of
course) no merits (acquired), nor the potential requisites there-
of; but thereafter they are (to be noticed) along with merits. Now,
however, only the merits exist; and they too, alas! (after a time)
are no longer there!
945. In course of time, after death (kälavas), appreciative
utterances with reference to the merits of the great man's (surviv-
ing) body of fame, become rare and rare and persist (as reminders)
here and there, like (scattered) fragments of the bones (of his
body).
946. Vicious traits, arising out of the permanently abiding
desires (within), serve as bondage for men of mean behaviour.
The merits of good men, however, (strongly resist and) cause
no temptations, (on the borderline of which) they (temptations)
immediately (jhatti) halt.
947. This is real detachment when the man's heart finds
happiness (and contentment) in whatever possessions have come
(to his hand). Censure of Laksmi, however, (on one's part),
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 403 =====
106
Gaüdavaho
betrays passion (for worldly pleasures), blended with an ingrained
jealousy (of those who enjoy wealth while he cannot).
948. Is this also not love of pleasures, (prompted by which)
men give up their houses full of many frauds and deceipt and find
delight in the innermost recesses of the forests abounding in
perennial water-streams?
949. Or rather, this is an ( indirect) way (cleverly to disclose)
one's own nature or (to pour) censure on the (abject life of)
service, when people go on praising the life of savage tribals
staying in the vicinity of the Vindhyas.
950. (For them) rivers with a variety of fauna, forests with
clean (lawn) surfaces and mountains resounding with fights of
elephants, enhance (virallanti) their pleasure.
951. Although (now) pure in his behaviour, do not touch
the wretched one. Evil stays (dormant) in him, carried over a
long time.
952. What other man would entertain respect for those merits
of the wretched ones, when even their own self shows aversion,
(caused by) a feeling of disgust for them?
953. Indeed, his own beloved even withdraws herself from
the man who has lost all his property. Does the night, with all
her body (i. e. for all time), unite with the moon, when not full
(with digits)?
954. O heart, find solace (nisammasu) somewhere. How
long would you torture (yourself), thus frustrated (äsähao)?
The miserable one? better (that this misery is) for one (i. c.
himself) only, and not for (all on) the whole earth.
955. Let this tall talk of uplifting the afflicted (vihala) cease.
How is that (possible) for the pygmies (aguru)? These fellows
are not capable of bringing about their own welfare even!
956. How can they, with their hearts infatuated with stiff
vanity for having secured wealth and a merit of some sort,
remember (bharikinti) other people, when even their own self
forgets (pamhusai) them?
957. As in their first acquaintence (pariaya), so (later also)
in the enjoyment (of their intimate association), men are difficult
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 404 =====
Ways of the World
107
(to deal with). Water, at first cool (when poured) over hands,
turns otherwise while drinking.
958. Rare indeed are those having manifold merits. Even
a man with a single (outstanding) merit is not found everywhere.
Lucky if we come across men, who (though without merits) have
at least no faults. We would (hail and) praise even a man with
but a rare fault.
959.
Behaviour, impolite, lends grace to public beauties.
Smoke alone is preferred to a blaze in the case of fragrant pieces
of wood.
960. In the sphere of mutual dealings (vavahärapaha), men
with a few faults in them are good and great. How otherwise.
(ihara) is intimate association possible with those, who are
(perfect), uncommon (and extraordinary)?
961. Of what use is the qualification on account of qualities
for those who cannot rise to eminence? It may be, this
(eminence) is not possible because of its being overshadowed
by other people's good deeds. Yet their qualification is there.
962. Those alone are (genuine) faults, which are heard
(being talked about) even after the man is dead. And those are
alone real qualities (high and noble), which are (lauded and)
recognised even during his life-time.
963. Observe (yicha) men's complexion (of countenance) only
in their open dealings. Why (talk) of (what he has in) his heart?
The flash of gems (teuggama), shooting outside, is not (seen in
the interior) of gems, if broken into pieces (bhangammi).
964. Some there are to whom merits are on par with faults;
some, who only look out for faults and some others, who are averse
as much to faults as to merits. There are, however, none who can
detect merits as well as faults and then pick up only merits.
965. A certain man (in the course of dealings) appears to
darken (slmäamta) (in his face), as it were; but then (taha vi)
he is quite pure at heart. It is only the greenish (raw) mango-
fruit, which develops (yellow colour to mark) its highest stage of
ripenesss (pariņāmaparamatha).
966. Although looking quite clean and pure (outwardly)
in his action, a man is exactly the same that he basically is (i. c.
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 405 =====
108
Gaūdavaho
true to his nature). The (saffron) filament, although reddish-
yellow, has (a relationship) in common (slmanya) with the
colour of saffron.
967. Noble men do praise a good man, even if his merits are
not observed in toto. Who would think of crushing a gem (to
pieces), because half of it is hidden (mia) (from view) by an
obstructive layer (padibandha)?
968. (Total) absence of faults (in man) shines as well as
a merit, if it rises above jealousy (maccharuttina). As in affluence,
so in (the possession of merits), self-consciousness (pride) is
agonising.
969. Since there is no respect for those who are without
even an iota of wealth, although otherwise highly regarded
(agghavia) for their merits, we pay our obeisance to wealth!
And for this reason too, away with wealth!
970. Good men, although feeling slighted and insignificant
with (the gifts of) wealth (offered) to oblige them, cheer themselves
up (dhirenti) (in the belief) that they could give satisfaction to
some at least with what little they have of merits (viagunalesehin).
971. To the good men, who (at times) forget (pamhusia)
their present plight (of poverty), occasions full of embarassment
(viliäin) to find their sides empty, when in confusion they hasten
in their ardour to give (rewards in appreciation), cause great
torment.
972. How could they, whose heart is always bowed low,
being constantly pulled down by anxiety (to find food) for the
belly (jharacinita), look up with high and lofty (uddhura)
minds, all their enterprises having come to naught?
973. Formerly (when we could afford), we gave to our
heart's content; even afterwards, continuing to give, we found
that our (stock of) wealth had come to an end (santhia). Then,
in destitution (abhävä), doles from others had to be accepted,
alas with our head bowed (in humiliation caused) by greed.
974. Merits of great men who feel dejected (and shaken)
for a moment, (having realised) that the intrinsic essence (value
of their merits) is not being understood (and recognised) by the
people, are rehabillitated (in themselves by them) with their own
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 406 =====
The Good and the Bad Men
109
sense of judgment and then they proceed to play (their part as
before).
975. Fate! Let it seize all wealth and let it, indeed, take away
the delights of spending. How can it, however, (affect and)
afflict the hearts, pleased in (the possession of) merits?
976. The more these great men, who never formed (and
developed) dependence on others, alienate and isolate themselves
(from people), the more does their reputation become firmly
deep-rooted.
977. By the acquisition of scriptural knowledge and by the
ripening of age, hearts do suffer what little effect (is produced)
by the losses of all the gorgeous display of wealth, although unwise
(to be so affected).
978. Considering that their own merits cannot bear
(comparison) in their confrontation (purao) with those of the
great, small men, (developing) association (ahigame) with the
meaner lot, completely wipe out (all traces of) the very existence
of their own merits.
979. By his false praise of the unworthy (asalāhase), a bad
man becomes doubly wicked; similarly, (by his false praise) of the
meritless (apaattaguna), a good man turns a wicked (flatterer)
both ways.
980. "In no way is he different (or apart) from me",
Whomsoever does he speak of in such words, him too he places,
by implication, just in the category of the wicked (in which he
himself is).
981. The outstanding excellence of the precious possess
ions of knowledge is intimated (sisai) by the ears (of those who
have them) wearing embellishments of the gold of poetry, up
above (the ears) and down below.
982. Lakṣml, abiding with men highly honoured (for their
merits), is never fickle. Hence (tena) if she herself leaves them at all or
if they themselves leave her, how can that be considered as her fault?
983. Even after having obtained the very highest forms
(accumae) of rich glory, thirst (for wealth) continues unabated.
The mountaineer (asks), even after having ascended the mountain-
top, what (part) of the sky has been overreached (or assailed) ?
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 407 =====
110
Gaüdavaho
984. The miser-masters, I think, build up a devotional
offering of lotuses (in worship) before the lotus-loving Goddess
Laksmi, in the guise of their hands folded in homage.
985. Is it not really just an act of suicide (maa) for those
mountains, who entered the ocean (to drown themselves, when
they found) that their trees had been despoiled of all their flowers
and fruit and their favourite birds had fled away?
986. When remedies (exist) for securing happiness and
avoiding unhappiness, those alone who exert get the reward, (which
is not obtained) by scratching (to coax and cajole) Fate, with
nails in the form of mere sallies of ambitious thoughts (without
action).
987. Why should not (ma) abundance and prosperity, which
once came unsolicited (agamtu), go away from them, though
they may be searching Laksmi, who has long passed them by
(ciravolina) because of their overpowering delusion?
988. In the same way (emea), even the withdrawals (from
public life) of men of fair behaviour through the ordainment of
Fate, turn out to be, I think, total (samahila) disasters.
989. Fate plays the villain; refusing to lift (anuppento) a
difficult (disastrous) situation from great men, although they
rise (valagganti) to great glory, while facing it with hearts
undejected.
990. We would believe (saddihimo) in the reward being
offered in this very (life on the) earth, provided the heart has
secured peace and tranquility (vinivvavana). We may not believe in
the seed (of piety and penance fertilising) in a retired life in the
forest and later yielding its rich fruit in the next world (heaven).
991. A man of plenty and affluence (vihavi) revels in special
forms (of enjoyment), while a man of very limited extention
(and addition to his property) desires only stability; thé (poor)
man with no money seeks a (sound) body and a man with
diseases is satisfied if only he can live (and breathe).
992. Conversational sessions (dialogues) with great men,
hard and difficult (to follow) at the beginning and vaguely expres-
sive and revealing during the stages (of discussion), come to a
close after a time.
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 408 =====
Old Age
111
993. Losing their flavour (appeal) by (the fact of their)
crowding (bahalattana) one after another, enjoyments fail (to
give thrill) and falter inside the hearts. Men with limited resources,
however, are said (susanti) to get their fill of happiness.
994. The heart, when once attached even to an insipid object,
is not possible to be turned away. People's belief in the fickleness
of the heart in this respect is only a delusion.
995. The two-fold intellectual aspirations (of men), eagerly
looking forward (to bliss) in both the worlds, are simultaneously
blocked (and buried deep) inside the heart's (cavity) by women,
with the (lid of) their firmly formed breasts (covering the heart).
996. How does the Bodiless (Cupid) strike? How, indeed,
can his shafts of flowers pierce (the heart of the victim)? Thus,
when the God of Love himself is indistinct (and obscure), how
can tangible pleasures (flow forth) from him?
997. How will women's (tender) heart develop this hard-
ness? (To achieve it), therefore, is this very adamantine crust
(vajjam) of breasts laid (over the heart)!
998. Man delights in his own actions and yet bewails his
own conduct and character. He condemns other's natures but
aspires (sihai) (to achieve) the merits of others.
999. (With age) man's hair becomes long and grey, which,
I believe, are veritable paths taken up by the emotions of the heart,
now going out, every day, as they came (before).
1000. The grip (vinivesa) of the stoop, bending the whole
body, shows by its grey hair the fact of the whole body turning
soon into an alms-bowl (karaka) of old age.
1001. The old man has a body bent in all places, bowed
(ohura) and pulled by the tendrils of skin-folds, its face turned
now towards the earth, as it were, (soon to be its burial place).
1002. The dark shade of the hair getting worne out with
old age, falls, I believe, over the various parts of the body, in thick
black drops, under the guise of black spots (freckles) on the skin.
1003. The grey substance (of old age) flows out from the
breasts of the lady of the house under the guise of the milk-stream,
being looked at with a sore mind by her husband, who feels that
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 409 =====
112
Gaüdavaho
her breasts are assailed and overpowered (into old age) by the
onset of her pregnancy.
1004. Everything, because of its insipid (disappointing) end,
turns into unhappiness. In fact, there is no (such thing as) happiness.
Since, what (appears to be) happiness is just a negation of
unhappiness and this (so called) happiness too is really unhappiness.
1005. All this Form in the guise of the Universe is a clear
manifestation of Non-existence (Abhava), like the blue appearance
of the sky turning out to be an illusion of occular perception.
1006. May a priceless (amolla) reward fall to the lot of
people,living such a dry and insipid worldy life, after having listened
to (the description of) our Master's sanctifying (pavana) merits.
God Siva assumes a lion's form to test the King's heroism
1007. The very same loose mass of matted hair, enveloped
by the lustre of His blue-black throat looking like the ichor of
Quarter-elephants, gains resemblance (karayi) with the mass of
the lion's mane.
1008. The Lord of snakes (Väsuki), receding (and stretch-
ing his body) back-wards from his hood placed over (Siva's)
head, tinged red by the lustre of his jewels, bears imitative similarity
(velamba) with (the lion's) tail, stopped (demarkated) by the
spreading brilliance of his back (patthi).
1009. The self-same skull-garlands adorning (uttasa) His
head, with their fiercely gaping (visatta) mouth-cavities, get the
grace of the curling cluster of hair on his (lion's) head.
1010. The same (curved) lines of reflection (padimāmaggā),
fallen down (oina) from his nail-tips and observed (saccavia)
in the (mirror-like) crescent of the moon on (His) head, go out
and become the hook-like claws of (the lion's) paws.
1011. Thus by the Three-eyed (God), wishing to measure
(tulium) the graceful might of him (our King), (His own form)
was transformed into the form of the Lord of beasts (lion), giving
fright (bhesia) even to the lion of Parvati.
The king's heroism, religious pursuit, greatness and benign rule
1012. The massive trunks of enemies' elephants were lopped
off (khuți) by him on the battle-fields, with streams of blood,
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 410 =====
The Churning of Ocean
113
looking like tongues (gushing forth) from their noses (thus
appearing) like poisonous snakes.
1013. The creeper-like, coiling column of smoke,(issuing from)
his sacrificial performances, looked fine like the dark path (sarani)
of the thick fluid of ichor (flowing from the temples) of the heavenly
elephant of Indra, invoked (on the earth) by his good deeds.
1014. The great ancestors of his family (kulapuvvä), although
made (to look) small by the magnificence of his merits, were
again elevated by him by his own greatness.
1015. His frowns of wrath (samrambhabhi idi), tolerating
(the co-existence of) the sighs of pity, look charming on him,
who, although strictly abiding by the code of controls and restric-
tions (imposed on the people) under his legal authority, rules
the world with their opposites (viz. love and sympathy).
The king as Visnu in his Tortoise incarnation, helping
in the churning of the ocean and accepting Laksmi
1016. The (Milky) ocean, with its conchs and coiling clusters
of jewels lifted up (to its surface), was observed by the Lord of
tortoises to be a (silver) plate full of worship-materials, as it were,
held up (to Him) in haste by the gods (to honour Him).
1017. The broad back of the Lord of tortoises, who had
emerged (ummilla) and relaxed His body, (giving out) breaths
for a long time, was again over-flown by waves.
1018. The big fish, balanced (on His back) by the Tortoise,
with the parts of their throats looking reddish at the time of the
exhalations of breath, appeared like clouds with repeated (puna-
rutta) lightning flashes.
1019. The gods and the demons watched the back of the
Lord of the tortoises, as whitishness was developed on that portion
(of the back), where the earth rubbed in close contact, leaving the
borders naturally blackish (as before).
1020. The reflection (phalima) of the (Mandara) mountain,
planted on (the back of) the Tortoise, cast on (the surface of)
the ocean and swaying and swinging in its position (pivesa) because
of waves, looked as if it was getting crooked and curved on account
of the bottom (of its foundation of the earth) being insufficient
(apahutta) (to cover and fully occupy the back).
G. 8
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 411 =====
114
Gaiidavaho
1021. The groves of trees, with the ends of their branches
bending low when thickly collected together by the encircling
(body of the coiling) Lord of snakes, hugged the mountain-side
by their tops, while they were being torn off by their roots.
1022. The spikes of the sharp-pointed claws of the Lord
of birds (Garuda), (embedded) inside the chest of the Lord of
snakes and now turned into knotty scars, are being rubbed off by
the friction (of the mountain) gratingly.
1023. Serried rows of the offshoots (pürohamäla) of trees,
forming circles (parivesa) with the increase in the speed (of the
revolving mountain), get smashed (phuttamti), as they strike the
(mountain) embankments at the time of wheeling round
(pariatti) (in its rotatory movement).
1024. The rivers on the mountain-ridges, although thin,
and small (talina), become big and wide, as their banks collapse
when shattered (vocchinna) by the water (splashing on them)
in the course of its coming to and going away (galgaa), as a result
of the whirling action of the moving mountain.
1025. Pools of water, with their bottoms loose and broad,
begin to drain off in thin streams at first, as the roots of their
(spring) holes inside are being scrubbed off and opened out by
the friction exerted by the Lord of snakes.
1026. The streams of mountain-currents, having (their
waters) ceased to be hurled at a long distance, when the (moving)
mountain slows down (to a stop) for rest, now form gradually a
small circle.
1027. The curving parts of the tusks of Quarter-elephants
with their thin tips, become flattened out owing to the friction of
the whirling, wide mountain-ridges.
1028. The tighter the Lord of snakes closes on the moun-
tain, bereft, as it is, of its trees and creepers (lost) in friction, the
more is he, while stretching (his body), wound round the
mountain.
1029. With the slough of Vasuki dropping down by friction
and in its whirling speed (raya) forming a circling fence round
the Tortoise, the ocean appears to have constructed a basin, as it
were.
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org

===== Page 412 =====
The Churning of Ocean
115
1030. Forest-rovers (appear to) go out, although they have
not actually come out of the mountain-valleys, having gradually
obtained sun-light, as the embankments (enclosing the valleys)
were being scrubbed and lost by the friction of the great Cobra.
1031. The downward paths of the straight-falling rocks, which
come into contact with each direction, one after another, because
of the churning action of the mountain, become crooked and
zig-zag
1032. The echo (of the sound of churning) just stayed put
in the momentarily emptied portion of the ocean itself, as the upper
aerial space (of the sky) was blocked by the upsurged water, which
filled the circle of directions all round in the sky.
1033. From a mountain ridge fell out blocks of embank-
ment, full of sharp pieces (dhāra) of Indra's thunderbolt, which
(blocks were in fact) knotty scars formed over (the parts of the
mountain-body) where its wings were clipped and which (scars)
are now extracted by the friction caused by Vásuki.
1034. The huge snakes just stretch themselves flat (over the
surface of the ocean), having pulled out their bodies, although
being coiled up in the whirling (waters of the) ocean, (floating)
relaxed (on the surface) after having straightened (saralia) the
whirlpools with their hissing.
1035. The rivers on the ridges develop the grace of creepers
twining round the trees, (the flow of) their waters having been
channeled through the paths, scooped up (earlier) by the friction of
Väsuki's (body) and now left off (by him).
1036. The sky above was forced out (evacuated) by the
ridges, the ground and the peaks of the mountain. The directions,
therefore, occupied only the mountain's middle part, thinned,
as it was, by friction.
1037. With its base on the back of the Tortoise scraped off
(vinihittha) and its big bulk (ahoa) reduced in size by the friction
of the Lord of snakes, the mountain, placed (simia) with great
difficulty before (on the back of the Tortoise), could now be taken
away with ease.
1038. The layer of the earth, moistened by (the water of)
the agitated ocean, formed a mud-plaster, as it were, to serve as
Jain Education International
For Private & Personal Use Only
www.jainelibrary.org